



Story Possibilities 
Possible
strategies
New
perspectives
Change
agenda
Best fit
strategies
Value Commitment Plan
How do I make it all happen?
Stage I:
Current Picture
What’s going on?
Stage II:
Preferred Picture
What do I need or want?
Stage III:
The Way Forward
How do I get what
I need or want?
The Skilled-Helper Model
• Tuning in
• Active listening
• Responding with empathy
• Checking understanding
• Probing
• Summarizing
• Challenging
• Negotiating
The Helping Dialogue:
Essential Communication Skills
Copyright 2 0 1 2 Cengage L earning. All Rights Reserved. M ay not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

THE SKILLED HELPER
A Problem-Management and Opportunity-
Development Approach to Helping
T E N T H E D I T I O N
Gerard Egan
Professor Emeritus
Loyola University of Chicago
±±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

The Skilled Helper: A Problem-
Management and
Opportunity-Development
Approach to Helping,
Tenth Edition
Gerard Egan
Publisher/Executive Editor:
Jaime Perkins
Acquisitions Editor: Seth Dobrin
Developmental Editor:
Arthur Pomponio
Assistant Editor: Naomi Dreyer
Editorial Assistant:
Travis Holland
Media Editor: Elizabeth Momb
Brand Manager: Liz Rhoden
Market Development Manager:
Kara Parsons
Content Project Manager:
Matthew Ballantyne
Art Director: Caryl Gorska
Manufacturing Planner:
Judy Inouye
Rights Acquisitions Specialist:
Roberta Broyer
Design, Production Services,
and Composition:
PreMediaGlobal
Cover Image:
© Duncan Walker/iStockphoto
© 2014, 2010 Brooks/Cole, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical,
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning,
digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or
information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted
under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706.
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012949260
ISBN-13: 978-1-285-06571-7
ISBN-10: 1-285-06571-9
Brooks/Cole
20 Davis Drive
Belmont, CA 94002-3098
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning
solutions with office locations around the globe, including
Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan.
Locate your local office at www.cengage.com/global.
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Brooks/Cole, visit
www.cengage.com/brookscole
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our
preferred online store www.cengagebrain.com.
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 16 15 14 13 12
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

C ONTENTS
P REFACE TO THE T ENTH E DITION ix
A G UIDE TO THE T ENTH E DITION xii
P ART I
LAYING THE G ROUNDWORK 1
C H A P T E R 1
T HE I NGREDIENTS OF S UCCESSFUL H ELPING 3
Formal and Informal Helpers: A Very Brief History 4
What Helping Is About 5
The Ingredients of Successful Helping 13
Embracing and Befriending the Uncertainties Inherent in Helping 29
Moving from Smart to Wise: Managing the Shadow Side of Helping 33
C H A P T E R 2
T HE H ELPING R ELATIONSHIP AND THE V ALUES T HAT D RIVE I T 36
The Helping Relationship 37
The Values That Drive the Helping Relationship 44
Respect as the Foundation Value 46
Empathy as the Primary Orientation Value 48
iii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

Proactive Appreciation of Diversity 51
Self-Responsibility as an Empowerment-Focused Value 58
A Bias for Action as an Outcome-Focused Value 65
Shadow-Side Realities in the Helping Relationship 67
P ART II
T HE T HERAPEUTIC DIALOGUE : COMMUNICATION AND
R ELATIONSHIP -B UILDING S KILLS 69
C H A P T E R 3
E MPATHIC P RESENCE : T UNING I N AND L ISTENING 71
The Importance of Communication Skills in Helping 72
Dialogue-Focused Interactions with Clients 73
Visibly Tuning In: The Importance of Empathic Presence 74
Active Listening: The Foundation of Understanding 80
Listening to the Key Ingredients of Successful Therapy 97
The Shadow Side of Listening: Forms of Distorted Listening 100
C H A P T E R 4
E MPATHIC R ESPONDING : W ORKING AT M UTUAL U NDERSTANDING 104
Introduction to Responding Skills and the Importance of Empathic
Relationships 105
The Three Dimensions of Responding Skills: Perceptiveness, Know-How,
and Assertiveness 109
Responding with Empathy 112
Becoming Competent and Confident in Responding with Empathy:
Principles and Guidelines 120
Tactics for Responding with Empathy 127
A Case: Mara, the Client and Carlos, the Helper 128
The Shadow Side of Responding 131
C H A P T E R 5
T HE A RT OF P ROBING AND S UMMARIZING 135
Nudging 135
The Art of Probing 136
The Art of Summarizing: Providing Focus and Direction 149
Mara and Carlos Revisited 153
iv Contents
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

The Shadow Side of Communication Skills: Essential, But Not
Everything 155
Developing Proficiency in Communication Skills 156
C H A P T E R 6
F ACILITATING C LIENT S ELF -C HALLENGE : F ROM N EW P ERSPECTIVES
TO N EW B EHAVIOR 158
Self-Challenge: The Basic Concept 159
Inviting Clients to Challenge the Blind Spots at the Root of Dysfunctional
Thinking, Emotional Expression, and Behavior 171
Specific Skills for Helping Clients Challenge Their Blind Spots and
Move to New Perspectives 175
C H A P T E R 7
H ELPER S ELF -C HALLENGE 191
Guidelines for Effective Invitations to Self-Challenge 192
The Challenges Related to Helping Clients Manage Reluctance
and Resistance 199
Guidelines for Helping Clients Move Beyond Reluctance
and Resistance 204
The Role of Negotiation in Challenge 208
The Shadow Side of Helpers 211
P ART III
T HE S KILLED HELPER PROBLEM -M ANAGEMENT AND
O PPORTUNITY -D EVELOPMENT A PPROACH TO HELPING 215
The Ingredients of Successful Therapy: A Review 216
C H A P T E R 8
A N I NTRODUCTION TO THE P ROBLEM -M ANAGEMENT P ROCESS 219
An Overview of the Stages of Problem Management 222
Flexibility in the Use of the Problem-Management Process 224
Stages of Change and Client Readiness for Change 227
Integrative Eclecticism: The Ongoing Search for Best Practice 229
“How Are We Doing?”—Ongoing Evaluation of the Helping Process 231
Understanding and Dealing with the Shadow Side of Helping Models 232
Contents v
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

C H A P T E R 9
S TAGE I-A: H ELP C LIENTS T ELL T HEIR S TORIES 236
A Brief Introduction to Stage I 237
Task I-A: Help Clients Tell Their Stories 239
Guidelines for Helping Clients Tell Their Stories 241
Help Clients Move into Action Right from the Beginning 255
C H A P T E R 1 0
S TAGE I: T ASK I-B: T HE R EAL S TORY
T ASK I-C: T HE R IGHT S TORY 259
Task I-B: The Real Story 260
Mara and Carlos in I-B 261
Help Clients Challenge Themselves to Participate as Fully as Possible
in the Helping Process 262
Immediacy: Dealing with Issues in the Helping Relationship Itself 266
The Wider Use of I-B: Rising to the Challenge 269
Task I-C: The Right Story 270
Help Clients Work on Issues That Will Add Value to Their Lives 270
Principles for Helping Clients Work on Issues That Make a
Difference 271
The Wider Use of I-C: Making the Right Choices 279
C H A P T E R 1 1
S TAGE II: D ESIGNING P ROBLEM -M ANAGING G OALS
T ASK II-A: P OSSIBILITIES FOR A B ETTER F UTURE 282
An Introduction to Stage II 283
The Role of Hope in Therapy 286
Task II-A: Help Clients Discover Possibilities for a Better Future 288
Skills for Identifying Possibilities for a Better Future 289
Cases Featuring Possibilities for a Better Future 299
C H A P T E R 1 2
S TAGE II: T ASK II-B: G OALS , O UTCOMES , I MPACT
T ASK II-C: C OMMITMENT 303
The Power of Goal Setting 304
Task II-B: Goals, Outcomes, Impact: Help Clients Move from
Possibilities to Choices 306
Flexible Guidelines in Helping Clients Set Goal for Themselves 308
vi Contents
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

What Kind of Change Do Clients Need and How Much? 320
Emerging Goals 326
Task II-C: Help Clients Commit Themselves—“What Am I
Willing to Pay for What I Want?” 327
Help Clients Commit Themselves to a Better Future 328
Great Expectations: Encourage Client Self-Efficacy—“I Can, I Will” 333
Stage II and Action 337
The Shadow Side of Goal Setting 339
C H A P T E R 1 3
S TAGE III: P LANNING THE W AY F ORWARD 342
The Three Tasks of Stage III 343
Mara and Carlos Revisited: Mara’s Goals 344
Task III-A: Help Clients Develop Strategies for Accomplishing
Their Goals 346
Principles for Helping Clients Discover Viable Strategies for
Accomplishing Goals 346
Task III-B: Help Clients Choose Best-Fit Strategies 352
Bud’s Amazing Odyssey 352
Criteria for Choosing Goal-Accomplishing Strategies 353
A Balance-Sheet Method for Choosing Strategies 357
Help Clients Link Best-Fit Strategies to Action 358
The Shadow Side of Selecting Strategies 359
Task III-C: Help Clients Formulate Viable Plans 361
Shaping the Plan: Two Cases 364
Principles for Humanizing the Mechanics of Constructive Change 366
Ready-Made Action Programs 370
C H A P T E R 1 4
I MPLEMENTATION : M AKING I T A LL H APPEN 373
Introduction to Implementation 374
Mara Moves into Action 375
Help Clients Move from Planning to Action: Principles of Effective
Implementation 377
Social Support and the Importance of Challenge 386
The Shadow Side of Implementing Change 391
Resilience: People’s Ability to Hold Themselves Together, Bounce Back,
and Grow 396
Contents vii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

Getting Along Without a Helper: A Striking Case 401
Choosing Not to Change 402
Revisiting the Key Ingredients of Successful Therapy 403
REFERENCES 405
N AME I NDEX 450
S UBJECT I NDEX 456
viii Contents
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

P REFACE TO THE T ENTH E DITION
In the tenth edition I knew I “had” to do a version that would be “totally the same
and totally different” in response to the best client-focused research over the last
ten years. “Totally the same” means all the useful themes that I have developed
over the past 35 years—the primacy of client focus, the importance of life-enhancing
client outcomes, the collaborative client-helper alliance, a problem-management
and opportunity-development approach, the essential communication skills needed
for effective client-helper dialogue, an emphasis on the values that drive the helping
process, the importance of diversity—stay intact although they have been reorganized
and simplified. “Totally different” refers to the use of my version of the “common
factors” approach to give new meaning and vitality to these themes and to the use
of the problem-management model to organize and give coherence to all these
themes. So what is new and what is updated?
The new approach revolves around my version of the “common factors”
approach to understanding success in therapy. The common factors research is a
search for “what works” in therapy (Duncan, Miller, Wampold, & Hubble,
2010), that is, those factors or elements or ingredients that are common to success-
ful therapy no matter which approach to therapy the helper uses. For instance,
research shows, not surprisingly, that a strong working alliance or relationship be-
tween client and helper contributes to successful outcomes in therapy. In these
pages I call these factors “the ingredients of successful therapy.” The ingredients
that I have pulled together include and move a bit beyond the ones described by
Duncan et al. (2010). These ingredients together with the reasons for including
them are explained in the totally rewritten first chapter and then become themes
that permeate the rest of the book. Naming them and describing what they have
to offer clients provides greater crispness and focus to the problem-management
and opportunity-development approach to therapy outlined is this book.
ix
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

My approach in the tenth edition underscores the importance of the CDOI
(client-directed, outcome-informed) movement in the helping professions (Bohart &
Tallman, 2010). Life-enhancing outcomes for clients constitute the backbone of
therapy. In this edition here is a heightened emphasis on clients and all that they
bring with them to the therapeutic encounter and on the importance of “keeping
the client in the driver’s seat” throughout the helping process.
Feedback—client to self, client to helper, helper to client, and helper to self
together with the give-and-take discussions these forms of feedback evoke—is pre-
sented as one of the key ingredients of successful therapy. This kind of feedback
has always been a theme in previous editions, but recent research has demonstrated
how essential it is to successful therapy. Feedback on progress toward desired out-
comes and on how each session contributes (or does not contribute) to progress
belongs in every session.
My version of what I call the Standard Problem Management Model, which is
found directly or indirectly, in practically every form of therapy organizes all the
skills, methods, and themes of successful helping. The problem-management
process is not about schools of psychology, interesting theories, or the latest fads.
It is about people with problem situations and unused opportunities. This
process—broadly speaking, a contextual cognitive-behavioral-emotive approach
to therapy—is presented as a valid treatment approach in itself. It is also a tool
of psychotherapy integration. Effective therapists appreciate the power of both
goal setting and planning even when the troubled person, or the world at large,
does not. Talking about goal setting and planning may evoke a yawn in some
quarters, but the challenge of the helper is to make them living, vibrant, useful
realities in the eyes of those seeking or needing help.
This edition makes it clear that effective decision making (and its shadow side)
lies at the heart of problem management and opportunity development and, there-
fore, at the heart of therapy. It is now included as one of the key ingredients of
successful therapy. Therapists help clients make decisions throughout the helping
process. Effective helpers understand both the bright and dark side of decision
making and become guides as troubled people muse about, make, glide toward,
flirt with, or fall into decisions—or attempt to avoid them. They also help clients
explore the possible unintended consequences of the decisions they are making.
Because decision making has a deep shadow side, the more therapists understand
its inner workings the better.
The essential uncertainties associated with human behavior, named in Chapter 1
of the tenth edition play an important role in therapy and require helping approaches
that are both rigorous and flexible. Both client-focused rigor and client-focused flexi-
bility in the use of models, methods, and skills permeate the chapters of this book.
The “non-scientific character” of the belief-values-norms-ethics-morality package,
and its relationship to decision making, is one of the principal causes of uncertainty
in therapeutic endeavors. This is not just an add-on.
This edition further promotes the concept of “personal culture,” the way that
each individual lives out the beliefs, values, and norms of the larger social culture.
Diversity at the individual client level takes precedence over any particular form of
diversity such as multicultural diversity. The personal culture of each individual cli-
ent includes his or her incorporation and expression of ethnic and cultural themes
x Preface to the Tenth Edition
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

together with all the other forms of diversity in his or her makeup. If social culture
is “the ways we do things,” then personal culture refers to “the way I do things” as
a member of any given culture. An N ¼ 1 research approach to the evaluation of
progress in therapy provides the kind of rigor that fits clinical situations while
respecting the personal culture of each client.
The clinical use of research findings demonstrates that therapists do not have
to choose between evidence-based practice and practice-based evidence. Therefore,
this edition avoids the “either-or mentality” that is found in much of the debate
about therapy. If we are client-focused, then we have a big tent. There is room for
both evidence-based practice and practice-based evidence. Either-or gives way to
both-and. The problem-management process is used as a “browser” to search for
a wide range of therapeutic methods and adapt them to the needs of this client.
Client need drives the process.
The tendency of the helping industry to avoid the term “challenge” is noted.
There is increased focus on invitations to clients to engage in self-challenge and
the concept of helper self-challenge is introduced. Therapy is presented as a form
of positive challenge in itself. If therapy is to make a difference, it must be different
from what happens in everyday life. Some form of challenge is part of this
difference.
In many ways clients (like the rest of us) create their own reality, but the reality
they create often has a way of biting back. Reality itself is challenging and incorpo-
rates the wisdom of the French saying, “Nos actes nous suivent,” that is, our ac-
tions have a way of pursuing us. Competent helpers espouse individual freedom,
but they do not confuse liberty with license. While they appreciate individuality,
they also recognize everyone’s need for some form of community. The model as
spelled out in these pages recognizes and delights in human diversity, but it remains
rooted in the commonalities of our humanity. There are many made-up rules, but
life has its own rules and we as therapists can help clients explore them.
Effective helpers know that grappling with problems in living is hard work and
don’t hesitate to caringly invite those seeking solutions to buckle down and engage
in that work. But not work for the sake of work. In the end helping is about work
that produces outcomes that favorably impact the lives of help seekers.
All of the above has led to extensive reorganization and restructuring of this
book and the rewriting of most chapters at the service of simplicity and coherence.
The book has three parts. Part I deals with the “key ingredients” approach, the role
of the therapist, the importance of the helping relationship, and the values that
drive the entire helping process. Part II focuses exclusively on the communication
skills therapists need to engage in a collaborative outcome-focused dialogue with
clients. Part III deals in detail with the problem-management and opportunity-
development approach. The contents of each part are spelled out in the Guide which
follows.
Preface to the Tenth Edition xi
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

A G UIDE TO THE T ENTH E DITION
This chapter-by-chapter guide is designed to help both instructors and students
familiarize themselves with the changes introduced in the 10th edition of The
Skilled Helper. Let’s start with some overall changes and then move from chapter
to chapter.
• Every word in the book has been scrutinized and many sections have been
rewritten for the sake of clarity or to introduce new ideas.
• Some 300 citations indicating new ideas regarding theory, research, and prac-
tice and updates of older ones are scattered throughout the book.
• I have tried to incorporate what seemed to me new or updated contributions to
the helping professions such as the importance of common factors related to
successful outcomes for clients, the key role feedback plays in therapy, and the
fact that there is no one right school or approach to treatment.
• I have included ideas from outside the helping professions, including ideas from
business and organizational behavior. The source of an idea is not important;
its therapeutic usefulness is.
• Chapters and sections within chapters have been rearranged for the sake of
logical order and clarity.
• Many of the changes are designed to soften the linearity or “hard edge” of
what some see as a highly logical problem-management process without, of
course, sapping it of any of its rigor.
• I have continued to develop the notion of the “shadow side” of the helping
profession, its processes, helpers themselves, and clients.
The Skilled Helper has always emphasized the basics of effective therapy
and has ignored the fads and the “the next big thing” in the helping industry.
xii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

This edition names, simplifies, clarifies, and organizes these basics more effectively.
This book has three major parts:
• Part I is an introduction to the “key ingredients of successful therapy”
approach.
• Part II is a detailed review of the communication skills needed by helpers to
engage in a therapeutic dialogue with clients.
• Part III is a detailed overview of the problem-management and opportunity-
development process at the heart of helping.
Part One: Introduction has two chapters. Chapter 1 has been completely
rewritten. It reinforces the fundamental client focus of therapy and the three goals
that contribute to this focus. Then, under the title of “the key ingredients of suc-
cessful therapy” it names and describes my version of the clinical application of
the “common factors” research carried out over the past ten years. Client focus is
the key ingredient of the helping process. Throughout the book the importance of
keeping the client “in the driver’s seat” is emphasized.
Chapter 2, also extensively rewritten, addresses three of the key ingredients of
successful therapy: (1) the role and competence of the therapist together with the
therapist’s skill at orchestrating the key ingredients and tailoring them to each cli-
ent’s needs; (2) the collaborative therapeutic relationship between client and helper;
and (3) the values that should permeate and drive the helping process together with
the importance of the beliefs-values-norms-ethics-morality dimensions of life as
manifested in the social and personal culture of the client.
Part Two: Therapeutic Communication Skills has five chapters all of which
focus on the communication skills needed by therapists to engage and interact suc-
cessfully with clients. This group of skills constitutes one of the key ingredients of
successful therapy. Therapists can use these skills to help clients with poor commu-
nication skills engage meaningfully in the therapeutic dialogue.
Chapter 3 highlights and illustrates the nature of the therapeutic dialogue
between client and helper together with three basic skills of therapeutic presence:
tuning in to clients, remaining engaged, and active listening.
While Chapter 2 discusses empathy as an essential human value, Chapter 4
shows how empathy is also a key communication skill. In this chapter empathy
becomes a clinical skill.
Chapter 5 outlines how therapists can use probing and summarizing to help
clients engage more fully in the helping process.
Chapter 6 considers the role and rationale of challenge and client self-challenge
in therapy. It details ways helpers can invite clients to engage in self-challenge with
regards to thinking, behaving, and expressing emotions without telling them how
they must think or behave.
Chapter 7 explores how helpful it is for therapists themselves to engage in self-
challenge throughout the helping process.
Part Three: The Problem-Management and Opportunity-Development Process
has seven chapters devoted to a detailed presentation of the problem-management
and opportunity-development process of helping. The problem-management process
is a key ingredient of successful therapy in two ways. First, all forms of therapy
A Guide to the Tenth Edition xiii
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

incorporate, directly or indirectly, many, if not all, of the dimensions of the Standard
Problem Management Process; that is, they discuss directly or infer problem explora-
tion, goal setting, finding ways of achieving problem-managing goals, and the ups and
downs of implementing goal-accomplishing plans. Second, this process seems to be a
psychological universal. People around the world readily recognize its broad strokes,
even though, like most of us, they don’t use it readily or effectively.
Chapter 8 is an introduction and overview of the problem-management and
opportunity-development approach. For the sake of simplicity, the “opportunity-
development” part of the title is often omitted, but this is not meant to diminish
the importance of opportunity development is the therapeutic process. This chapter
reinforces the importance of feedback, one of the key ingredients of successful ther-
apy, at the beginning and end of each session.
A simplified graphic is introduced in this edition. It serves two purposes. First,
it stresses the interactive and nonlinear nature of the problem-management process.
Stages (I, II, and III) and tasks within the stages (A, B, and C), though presented in
logical order, are seldom sequential in practice. Effective helpers use the problem-
management process flexibly. They start with client needs and, in collaboration
with clients, tailor the process to those needs. Second, the graphic also highlights
the importance of outcome-focused action on the part of clients throughout the
helping process.
Chapters 9 and 10 deal with the three tasks (A, B, and C) of Stage I (Help
Clients Tell Their Stories Fully and Work on Issues That Will Make a Difference).
Remember that a task is nothing more than something a therapist can do to help a
client move forward in some part or phase of the problem-management process.
Task I-A in Chapter 9 outlines how therapists, using the communication skills
discussed in Part II, can help clients explore their concerns, and presents guidelines
for helping them do so. This chapter also shows how the very telling of stories by
clients can suggest to them things that they can do to begin moving in the right
direction without, of course, engaging in premature or inadvisable action.
Chapter 10 describes and illustrates the other two tasks of Stage I. Task I-B
discusses ways therapists can help client develop new, more accurate, and more
useful perspectives on their problem situations. This task also describes ways that
counselor can invite clients to challenge the ways they think, behave, and express
emotions.
Task I-C outlines ways therapists can help client focuses on real issues, that is,
issues that will make a difference in their lives. This task underscores the continual
search for client-benefitting value throughout the helping process.
Chapters 9 and 10 make two things clear. First, these three tasks related to help-
ing clients tell their stories are not linear. Rather they intermingle and interact. Sec-
ond, these three tasks are useful throughout the entire helping process, that is, in all
three stages. First of all, clients do not necessarily tell the whole story all at once.
They often add things to the basic story throughout the helping process. Second,
new perspectives and self-challenge are welcomed in every stage. Third, it is impor-
tant not only to work on the right issue but also to set the right goals, and to come
up with the right set of strategies and the right plan for achieving these goals.
Chapters 11 and 12 describe the three tasks (A, B, C) of Stage II (Help Clients
Set Problem-Managing Goals and the Plans to Accomplish These Goals). A goal is
xiv A Guide to the Tenth Edition
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

defined as a desired problem-managing outcome. Chapter 11 focuses on Task II-A,
which poses and suggests ways of answering this key question, “What would
things look like if this problem situation were managed or this opportunity devel-
oped?” This task is about discovering possibilities for a better future. Creative
thinking is important.
Chapter 12 covers Tasks B and C of goal setting. Task II-B deals with helping
clients choose problem-managing goals. Problem management is filled with deci-
sion making. Therapists help client make life-enhancing decisions. Task II-C is
about helping clients explore the quality of their commitment to both the goals
they choose and to the entire problem-management process.
Chapter 13 describes Stage III (The Way Forward: Help Clients Make Plans
to Accomplish Goals) and its three tasks. Task III-A outlines ways of helping
clients discover strategies for achieving goals. Task III-B focuses on helping clients
choose a strategy or a set of strategies that best fit the client’s style and resources.
Task III-C shows ways of helping clients organize these strategies into a workable
plan. This chapter points out how important it is for therapists to turn the
“mechanics” of problem management as outlined in these chapters into a fully
human experience.
Chapter 14 (Implementation: Help Clients Make It All Happen) addresses
ways of helping clients turn plans into action and action into outcomes that have
the desired impact on the lives of clients. It reaffirms the notion that problem-
managing action on the part of clients should, with prudence, start as early as feasi-
ble in the helping process. Obstacles to implementation and ways of overcoming
them are reviewed. Finally, the power of both resilience and posttraumatic growth
are celebrated.
B ECOMING A S KILLED HELPER
If you come to a good understanding of all the models, methods, and skills
described and illustrated in this book, would you be “a skilled helper”? Not yet,
because knowledge and competence are not the same thing. You need to be trained
in these models, methods, and skills. The Introduction to Exercises in Helping
Skills: A Manual to Accompany THE SKILLED HELPER (Egan, Owen, & Reese,
2014) outlines a rigorous training methodology that I have used over the years to
train aspiring helpers in a number of different cultures. The manual, which is part
of the training program, gives you an opportunity to get a feeling for and, eventu-
ally, basic competence in the models, methods, and skills outlined in this book. The
full training methodology, which includes practice and supervision, would speed
you on your way, but then would you be a skilled helper? Maybe. A skilled helper
is more than a technician, even a very competent technician. Helping others is more
than a job, more than a career. The helping professions call for more than just
knowledge and competence. There is a vocational dimension to it. I’ve been going
to the same doctor for over 30 years. Medicine is his vocation. We have great con-
versations. He doesn’t do medical research, but he shares the latest findings in med-
ical research when he believes they will benefit me. Spending time with him is not
just a visit; it’s an event. We need people like him in the helping professions. You’re
lucky. You can start down that path right away.
A Guide to the Tenth Edition xv
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

TO:
Adrian, Aideen, Al, Andrew, Angie, Ann, Anna, Arthur, Austin, Barbara, Barry,
Ben, Bernie, Bill, Bob, Brendan, Brian, Byron, Carl, Casey, Cher, Chido, Charlie,
Chuck, Colin, Dan, Danny, David, Declan, Dennis, Dick, Don, Donal, Donna,
Doug, Ed, Edwin, Eleanor, Erin, Ernestine, Evelyn, Frank, Gene, George, Gerry,
Gitta, Hany, Harris, Helen, Hisham, Elizabeth, Holly, Homer, Ian, Jack, Jackie,
Jan, Janet, Janette, Jasper, Jay, Jayson, Jeff, Jennifer, Jerry, Jesse, Jim, Joe, John,
Jon, Jonathan, Justin, Kathe, Kathleen, Kathy, Katie, Keith, Ken, Ketti, Kevin,
Kieran, Laura, Lew, Linda, Lisa, Malcolm, Marge, Mark, Mary, Mary Kay, Lynn,
Martha, Maureen, Max, Melissa, Mike, Nassry, Nick, Pat, Patrick, Paul, Peter,
Phil, Queenie, Rami, Ramzi, Ray, Rich, Rick, Rina, Roberta, Rod, Roel, Ross,
Roxanne, Rudaina, Rudy, Sakae, Sal, Sammer, Sandy, Sawako, Sayoko, Scott, Seth,
Simon, Stefanie, Stephen, Steve, Steven, Sue, Suhair, Taz, Terry, Thad, Tim, Tom,
Tony, Toots, Trish, Vincent, Walter, Weijun, Weilian, William, Yoshi, Yugi
You’ve all played a part. Thank you.
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

P A R T
±±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
± 
I
L AYING THE
G ROUNDWORK
Although the centerpiece of this book is a problem-management and opportunity-
development framework that encompasses all the ingredients of successful helping
(Part III) and the communication and relationship-building skills needed to engage
in the client-helper dialogue (Part II), some groundwork (Part I) is required.
In Part I, Chapter 1 outlines the nature and goals of helping and the ingredients
of successful helping together with a snapshot of the problem-management and
opportunity-development framework that organizes these ingredients. Chapter 2
focuses on the helping relationship and the values that drive it. Both chapters
highlight the client-centered and outcome-focused nature of helping espoused in
this book.
1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

C H A P T E R
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
±
± 
1
T HE I NGREDIENTS OF
S UCCESSFUL H ELPING
CHAPTER CONTENTS
Formal and Informal Helpers: A Very Brief History
What Helping Is About
• Clients with Problem Situations and Unused Opportunities
• The Three Principal Outcome-Focused Goals of Helping
The Ingredients of Successful Helping
• The Client and the Contextual Factors of the Client’s Life
• The Person of the Therapist
• The Helping Relationship
• Communication Skills at the Service of Dialogue
• Two-Way Feedback Between Client and Helper
• The Treatment Approach and Its Methods and Techniques
• Problem Management: A Human Universal and a Common Factor
• Decision Making: A Psychological Universal and a Common Factor
• The Beliefs-Values-Norms-Ethics-Morality Factors That Drive Human Behavior
Embracing and Befriending the Uncertainties Inherent in Helping
• The Client and the Contextual Factors of the Client’s Life
• The Therapist
• The Helping Relationship
• The Therapeutic Dialogue
• Two-Way Feedback Between Client and Helper
3
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

• The Model or Method of Treatment and the Assumptions Behind It
• The Standard Problem Management Process as a Human Universal
• Decision Making as a Human Universal
• The Beliefs-Values-Norms-Ethics-Morality Factors
Moving from Smart to Wise: Managing the Shadow Side of Helping
FORMAL AND INFORMAL HELPERS:
A VERY BRIEF HISTORY
Throughout history people the world over have held a deeply embedded conviction
that, under the proper conditions, some of us are capable of helping others come to
grips with problems in living. This conviction, of course, plays itself out differently
in different cultures, but it is still a cross-cultural phenomenon. Today this convic-
tion is often institutionalized in a variety of formal helping professions. In Western
cultures, counselors, psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, and ministers of
religion among others are counted among those whose formal role is to help people
manage the distressing problems of life.
A second set of professionals, although they are not helpers in the formal sense,
also help people in times of crisis and distress. Included here are organizational con-
sultants, dentists, doctors, lawyers, nurses, probation officers, teachers, managers,
supervisors, police officers, and practitioners in other service industries. Although
these people are specialists in their own professions, there is still some expectation
that they will help those they serve manage a wide variety of problem situations.
For instance, teachers teach English, history, and science to students who are grow-
ing physically, intellectually, socially, and emotionally and struggling with develop-
mental tasks and crises. Teachers are, therefore, in a position to help their students,
in direct and indirect ways, explore, understand, and deal with the problems of
growing up. Managers and supervisors in work environments help workers cope
with problems related to job performance, career development, interpersonal relation-
ships in the workplace, and a variety of personal problems that affect their ability to
do their jobs. This book is addressed directly to the first set of professionals and
indirectly to the second.
To these professional helpers can be added any and all who try to help others
come to grips with problems in living: relatives, friends, acquaintances, and even
strangers (on buses and planes). In fact, only a small fraction of the help provided
on any given day comes from helping professionals. Informal helpers—bartenders
and hairdressers are often mentioned—abound in the social settings of life. Friends
help one another through troubled times. Parents need to manage their own mari-
tal problems while helping their children grow and develop. Indeed, most people
grappling with problems in living seek help, if they seek it at all, from informal
sources (Swindle, Heller, Pescosolido, & Kikuzawa, 2000). In the end, of course,
all of us must learn how to help ourselves cope with the problems and crises of
life. Sometimes we do this on our own, but at other times we seek help from
4 Chapter 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

mostly informal sources. This book is about the basic ingredients of successful
helping. It is designed to assist you in becoming a better helper no matter which
category you fall into.
WHAT HELPING IS ABOUT
Helping is first and foremost about the person seeking help. Let’s call the person
seeking or needing help a client rather than patient to avoid, at least for the time,
the dispute relating to the use of the medical model in helping (Wampold, 2010a,
2010b). To determine what helping is about, it is useful to consider (1) why people
seek—or are sent to get—help in the first place and (2) what the principal goals of
the helping process are.
C LIENTS WITH P ROBLEM S ITUATIONS AND UNUSED OPPORTUNITIES
Many people become clients because, either in their own eyes or in the eyes of
others, they are involved in problem situations that they are not handling well.
Others seek help because they feel they are not living as fully as they might. Many
come because of a mixture of both. Therefore, clients with problem situations and
unused opportunities constitute the starting point and the primary focus of the
helping process.
Problem situations Clients come for help because they have crises, troubles,
doubts, difficulties, frustrations, or concerns. Often called “problems,” generically,
they are not problems in a mathematical sense because these problems usually
cause emotional turmoil and often have no clear-cut solutions. It is probably better
to say that clients come not with problems but with problem situations—that is,
with complex and messy problems in living that they are not handling well. These
problem situations are often poorly defined. Or, if they are well defined, clients
still don’t know how to handle them. Or clients feel that they do not have the
resources needed to cope with them adequately. If they have tried solutions, they
have not worked.
All of us face problems in living. Problem situations arise in our interactions
with ourselves, with others, and with the social settings, organizations, and institu-
tions of life. Clients—whether they are hounded by self-doubt, tortured by unrea-
sonable fears, grappling with the stress that accompanies serious illness, addicted
to alcohol or drugs, involved in failing marriages, fired from jobs because of per-
sonal behavior, office politics, or disruptions in the economy, confused or abused
in their efforts to adapt to a new culture, returning from some battlefield with the
psychological ravages associated with war, suffering from a catastrophic loss, jailed
because of child abuse, struggling with a midlife crisis, lonely and out of community
with no family or friends, battered by their spouses, or victimized by racism—all
face problem situations that move them to seek help. In some cases, these problem
situations move others—such as teachers, supervisors, the courts—to refer people
who are not managing their problems very well to helpers or even mandate that
they seek help.
The Ingredients of Successful Helping 5
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

Even people with devastating problem situations can, with help, handle these
situations more effectively. Consider the following example.
Martha S., age 58, suffered three devastating losses within 6 months. One of her
four sons, who lived in a different city, died suddenly of a stroke. He was only 32.
Shortly after, she lost her job in a downsizing move stemming from the merger of
her employer with another company. Finally, her husband, who had been ill for about
2 years, died of cancer. Though she was not destitute, her financial condition could
not be called comfortable, at least not by middle-class North American standards.
Two of her other three sons were married with families of their own. One lived in a
distant suburb. The other in a different city. The unmarried son, a sales rep for an
international company, traveled abroad extensively.
After her husband’s death, she became agitated, confused, angry, and depressed.
She also felt guilty. First, because she believed that she should have done “more” for
her husband. Second, because she also felt strangely responsible for her son’s early
death. Finally, she was deathly afraid of becoming a burden to her children. At first,
retreating into herself, she refused help from anyone. But eventually she responded to
the gentle persistence of her church minister. She began attending a support group at
the church. A psychologist who worked at a local university provided some direction
for the group. Helped by her interactions within the group, she slowly began to accept
help from her sons. She began to realize that she was not the only one who was
experiencing a sense of loss. Rather she was part of a “grieving family,” the members
of which needed to help one another cope with the turmoil they were experiencing.
She began relating with some of the members of the group outside the group
sessions. This helped fill the social void she experienced when her company laid
her off. She had an occasional informal chat with the psychologist who provided
services for the group. Eventually, through contacts within the group she got
another job. Gradually her depression eased and, despite some persistent anxieties,
she found a kind of peace.
Note that help came from many quarters. Her newfound solidarity with her family,
the church support group, the active concern of the minister, the informal chats
with the psychologist, and upbeat interactions with her new friends helped Martha
enormously. Furthermore, because she had always been a resourceful person, the
help she received enabled her to tap into her own unused strengths.
It is important to note that none of this “solved” the losses she had experi-
enced. Indeed, the goal of helping is not to “solve” problems but to help the
troubled person manage them more effectively or even to transcend them by
taking advantage of new possibilities in life. Problems have an upside. They are
opportunities for learning.
Missed opportunities and unused potential Some clients come for help not
because they are dogged by problems like those listed earlier but because they are
not as effective as they would like to be. And so clients’ missed opportunities and
unused potential constitute a second starting point for helping. Most clients, like
the rest of us, have resources they are not using or opportunities they are not devel-
oping. People who feel locked in dead-end jobs or bland marriages, who are
frustrated because they lack challenging life goals, who feel guilty because they are
failing to live up to their own values and ideals, who want to do something more
constructive with their lives, or who are disappointed with their uneventful
6 Chapter 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

interpersonal lives—such clients come to helpers not to manage their problems
better but to live more fully.
It is not a question of what is going wrong but of what could be better. It
has often been suggested that most of us use only a small fraction of our potential.
Most of us are capable of dealing much more creatively with ourselves, with our
relationships with others, with our work life, and, generally, with the ways in which
we involve ourselves with the social settings of our lives. Consider the following case.
After 10 years as a helper in several mental health centers, Carol was experiencing
burnout. In the opening interview with a counselor, she berated herself for not being
dedicated enough. Asked when she felt best about herself, she said that it was on
those relatively infrequent occasions when she was asked to help provide help for
other mental health centers that were experiencing problems, having growing pains, or
reorganizing. The counselor helped her explore her potential as a consultant to human-
service organizations and make a career adjustment. She enrolled in an organization
development program at a local university. In this program she learned not only a
great deal about how organizations work (or fail to work) but also how to adapt
her skills to organizational settings. Carol stayed in the helping field, but with a new
focus and a new set of skills.
In this case, the counselor helped the client manage her problems (burnout, guilt) by
helping her identify, explore, and develop an opportunity (a new career). The helper
was a catalyst; Carol took the lead.
Helping clients identify and develop unused potential and opportunities can be
called a “positive psychology” goal. Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi (2000) called
for a better balance of perspectives in the helping professions. In their minds, too
much attention is focused on pathology and too little on what they call “positive
psychology”: “Our message is to remind our field that psychology is not just the
study of pathology, weakness, and damage; it is also the study of strength and vir-
tue. Treatment is not just fixing what is broken; it is nurturing what is best” (p. 7).
They and their fellow authors discuss such upbeat topics as subjective well-being,
happiness, hope, optimism, the capacity for love, forgiveness, civility, nurturance,
altruism, an appreciation of beauty and art, responsibility, self-determination, cour-
age, perseverance, moderation, future mindedness, originality, creativity, talent, a
civic sense, spirituality, and wisdom. Traditionally, this has not been the ordinary
language of the helping professions.
Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi’s challenge has stimulated a great deal of theory,
research, debate, and practical programs for helping clients identify and tap into un-
used resources and opportunities (Biswas-Diener & Dean, 2007; Carr, 2004; Diener &
Biswas-Diener, 2008a, 2008b; Dykens, 2006; Ince, 2009; Peterson, 2006; Seligman,
2004; Seligman, Steen, Park, & Peterson, 2005; Siegel & Allison, 2009; Simonton &
Baumeister, 2005; Snyder & Lopez, 2005, 2006). Helping is not just about “fixing,”
but about enabling clients to design and redesign their lives. Ince (2009) in
a Harvard Medical School Special Health Report refers to positive psychology as
“the science of satisfaction” (p. 2). Obviously both fixing and redesigning have a
place in helping and one often melds into the other. Effective counselors help clients
choose the mix that is best for them. The “materials” of designing/redesigning are
the often overlooked resources within the client—strengths, values, beliefs, pools of
resilience that currently lie unnoticed. Sometimes it is better to help clients transcend
The Ingredients of Successful Helping 7
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

problems than to work through them. Positive psychology suggests ways of doing
just that.
You will find the positive psychology research and literature useful in striking
a balance with your clients. But, because there is a human tendency to turn what
is useful into a fad, a note of caution is appropriate. Positive psychology is not an
“everything’s going to be all right” approach to life. Richard Lazarus (2000) put
it well:
However, it might be worthwhile to note that the danger posed by accentuating the
positive is that if a conditional and properly nuanced position is not adopted, positive
psychology could remain at a Pollyanna level. Positive psychology could come to be
characterized by simplistic, inspirational, and quasi-religious thinking and the message
reduced to “positive affect is good and negative affect is bad.” I hope that this ambitious
and tantalizing effort truly advances what is known about human adaptation, as it
should, and that it will not be just another fad that quickly comes and goes. (p. 670)
Ongoing research (McNulty & Fincham, 2012) challenges the often-inflated
claims made in the name of positive psychology. And this is only right. However,
at its best, helping by whatever name (counseling, therapy, psychotherapy) engen-
ders in clients hope for a better life. Clients with hope are more likely to achieve
life-enhancing goals. There is a more detailed discussion of hope in Chapter 11
in Part III.
T HE T HREE P RINCIPAL OUTCOME -FOCUSED G OALS OF H ELPING
A great deal of the helping literature focuses on the models, methods, and skills of
helping. Less focuses on outcomes. That is a pity because helping should be mainly
about life-enhancing outcomes for clients. Duncan, Miller, and their associates
(2010) and a growing number of researchers and practitioners are working to intro-
duce a better balance into the helping professions. They talk about “client-directed
and outcome-informed” (CDOI) helping. As indicated earlier, the primary focus of
helping is the client with unmanaged problem situations and/or unused resources,
strengths, and opportunities. But because helpers do not solve or manage clients’
problems, it is essential to help clients become agents of change in their own lives.
And change means life-enhancing outcomes in terms of problems managed and
opportunities spotted and developed.
Tim was a victim of cyberbullying. A small group of his classmates who thought he
was a “sissy” or a “fag” used the Internet, social media, and mobile phones to torment
and humiliate him. Tim, actually a very decent normal teenager, was embarrassed
and confused. He did not know who was doing this or why. He became chronically
anxious, stopped going out with friends, and curtailed his social life in other ways.
Once the perpetrators saw that they had Tim on the run, they increased the frequency
of their attacks. Only when he finally begged his parents to let him go to a different
school did they realize what was happening. Tim’s parents moved into action. First,
they provided whatever support they could by talking with Tim. Next they arranged
a meeting with a school counselor who began to help Tim manage his humiliation
and anxiety. Then they had a meeting with the school principal. The principal made a
school announcement stating that cases of cyberbullying were in progress and that data
8 Chapter 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

was being gathered to share with parents of the offenders and, if necessary, the police.
The cyberbullying stopped—or went deeper underground—almost immediately. The
school’s Parents Association came out with a strong zero-tolerance statement about
bullying in all its forms. But it members also began to discuss how to implement such
a policy without turning the school into a police state. “It’s about time,” one of the
parents said. Things exploded when a couple of research articles on bullying and other
forms of adolescent aggression in schools, mostly psychological and social, hit the
headlines (Faris & Ennett, 2011; Faris & Felmlee, 2011). Psychological and social
aggression, primed by the Internet, seemed to be much more widespread in schools than
anyone realized. The research showed that over half the students in the study either
engaged in aggression, were victims of aggression, or fell into both camps.
There were some constructive outcomes. Because of his parents’ support and the
counselor’s help Tim’s anxieties eased. A couple of his friends took him aside and
confessed that they knew what was happening but didn’t have the courage to do
anything about it. Tim came to realize that school life had an “edge” to it and that
he had to deal with it. And he still had some good friends, including the parents of
some of his classmates and some of the adults in the neighborhood. His parents did
not become over-protective but both they and Tim sensed a better, more mutual
relationship. The school began to search for ways of taking adolescent aggression
seriously.
Tim ended up with a better sense of himself and of the darker side of communal life,
a more secure environment, decreased anxiety, and more supportive relationships
with his parents and some of his friends. He got his life back. The bullies may not
have had a change of heart but they did get some kind of wake-up call.
As we have seen, clients come to helpers primarily because they want or need
to manage specific problems situations more effectively and/or develop unused
opportunities in order to live life more fully. This is the first goal of helping. But
counseling, done right, can help them achieve two other goals. Let’s take a look at
all three. Read what follows and then return to Tim’s case and see if you can find
elements of all three goals.
Goal One: Life-enhancing outcomes for the client. Help clients manage their
problems in living more effectively and develop unused or underused resources and
opportunities more fully at the service of life-enhancing outcomes.
Helpers are successful to the degree to which their clients—through client–helper
interactions—see the need to manage specific problem situations and develop
specific unused resources and opportunities more effectively. Notice that I stop
short of saying that clients actually end up managing problems and developing
opportunities better. Although counselors help clients achieve valued outcomes,
they do not control those outcomes directly. In the end, clients can choose to live
more effectively or not.
A corollary to Goal One suggests that helping is about constructive change that
leads to life-enhancing results, outcomes, accomplishments, and impact. Satisfac-
tion, symptom reduction, constructive change as perceived by self and/or others,
and end-point improved functioning have all been studied as positive outcomes
of therapy (Lunnen, Ogles, & Pappas, 2008). All of these outcomes point to an
improved life on the part of the client. Helping is an “-ing” word: It includes a
series of activities in which helpers and clients engage. These activities, however,
The Ingredients of Successful Helping 9
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

have value only to the degree that they lead to valued outcomes in clients’ lives.
Ultimately, statements such as “We had a good session,” whether spoken by the
helper or by the client, must translate into more effective living on the part of the
client. If a helper and a client engage in a series of counseling sessions productively,
something of value will emerge that makes the sessions worthwhile. Unreasonable
fears will disappear or diminish to manageable levels, self-confidence will replace
self-doubt, addictions will be conquered, an operation will be faced with a degree
of equanimity, a better job will be found, a woman and man will breathe new life
into their marriage, a battered wife will find the courage to leave her husband,
a man embittered by institutional racism will regain his self-respect and take his
rightful place in the community. A past president of the American Counseling
Association put it this way:
If counseling is constructive, clients grow and open up. They make purposeful decisions.
They stop behaviors that are destructive and nonproductive such as fighting, being
passive, or just blabbering. They quit trying to externally control others and begin taking
charge of themselves. They assess and utilize their strengths. Outside of sessions, they
practice new behaviors through role-plays and simulations. They confront injustices and
abuse. They give themselves permission to seek wellness. The outcome is substantial,
for old habits become history and new skills, realities, and lifestyles emerge. (Gladding,
2005, p. 5)
Helping is about constructive change that makes a substantive difference in the life
of the client.
The kind of results discussed in this book can be perceived by clients and
people who interact with clients such as family, friends, peers, and co-workers.
Kazdin (2006), who works with families and children, emphasizes the importance
of moving beyond change based on statistical significance and even clinically
significant change to change that has palpable impact on clients’ daily lives. Here
Kazdin provides some examples of outcomes that make a difference in the everyday
life of a child with “conduct disorder” and the lives of those who interact with him.
For example, one can see that the child no longer beats up a parent, teacher, or
siblings; has stopped running away from home; does homework for the first time; no
longer steals from neighbors; no longer brandishes a knife with younger siblings or
peers; interacts appropriately with an infant sibling (e.g., talk, gentle play) rather than
physically abusing him or her; and becomes only mildly upset during a tantrum at
home without any of the usual property destruction. (p. 47)
The need for “palpable” results is not new. Effective helpers have realized this
throughout the history of helping. Thirty years ago Driscoll (1984) saw this clearly
in his work with Andrea N., a battered woman.
The mistreatment had caused her to feel that she was worthless even as she developed
a secret superiority to those who mistreated her. These attitudes contributed in turn
to her continuing passivity and had to be challenged if she was to become assertive
about her own rights. Through the helping interactions, she developed a sense of worth
and self-confidence. This was the first outcome of the helping process. As she gained
confidence, she became more assertive; she realized that she had the right to take
stands, and she chose to challenge those who took advantage of her. She stopped
merely resenting them and did something about it. The second outcome was a pattern
10 Chapter 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

of assertiveness, however tentative in the beginning, that took the place of a pattern
of passivity. When her assertive stands were successful, her rights became established,
her social relationships improved, and her confidence in herself increased, thus further
altering the original self-defeating pattern. This was a third set of outcomes. As she saw
herself becoming more and more an “agent” rather than a “patient” in her everyday
life, she found it easier to put aside her resentment and the self-limiting satisfactions
of the passive-victim role and to continue asserting herself. This constituted a fourth
set of outcomes. The activities in which she engaged, either within the helping sessions
or in her day-to-day life, were valuable because they led to these valued outcomes.
(1984, p. 64)
Andrea needed much more than “good sessions” with a helper. She needed to focus
on and work toward outcomes that made a difference in her life.
Goal Two: Learning how to help oneself. Help clients become better at helping
themselves in their everyday lives.
Clients often are poor problem solvers, or whatever problem-solving ability they
have tends to disappear in times of crisis or personal challenge. What G. A. Miller,
Galanter, and Pribram (1960) said many years ago is, unfortunately, probably just as
true today.
In ordinary affairs we usually muddle about, doing what is habitual and customary,
being slightly puzzled when it sometimes fails to give the intended outcome, but not
stopping to worry much about the failures because there are still too many other things
still to do. Then circumstances conspire against us and we find ourselves caught failing
where we must succeed—where we cannot withdraw from the field, or lower our self-
imposed standards, or ask for help, or throw a tantrum. Then we may begin to suspect
that we face a problem…. An ordinary person almost never approaches a problem
systematically and exhaustively unless he or she has been specifically educated to do so.
(pp. 171, 174)
Many people in our society are still not “educated to do so.” And if many clients
are poor at managing problems in living, they are equally poor in identifying and
developing opportunities and unused resources. We have yet to find ways of mak-
ing sure that our children develop what most consider to be essential “life skills”
such as problem management, opportunity identification and development, sensible
decision making, and the skills of interpersonal relating.
It is no wonder, then, that clients—often poor problem solvers to begin with—
often struggle when crises arise. If the second goal of the helping process is to be
achieved—that is, if clients are to go away better able to manage their problems
in living more effectively and develop opportunities on their own—then helpers
need to impart the working knowledge and skills clients need to move forward. As
Nelson-Jones (2005) puts it, “In the final analysis the purpose of using counseling
skills is to enable clients to become more skilled in their own right.... Counselors
are only skilled to the extent that they can be successful in skilling clients” (p. 14).
That is, helping at its best provides clients with tools to become more effective
self-helpers. Therefore, although this book is about a process helpers can use
to help clients, more fundamentally it is about a problem-management and
opportunity-development process that clients can use to help themselves. This process
can help clients become more effective problem situation managers and opportunity
The Ingredients of Successful Helping 11
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

developers, better decision makers, and more responsible “agents of change” in their
own lives.
Goal Three: Developing a prevention mentality. Help clients develop an action-
oriented prevention mentality in their lives.
Just as doctors want their patients to learn how to prevent illness through good
nutrition and healthy activities, just as dentists want their patients to engage in ef-
fective prevention activities, so skilled helpers want to see their clients anticipate
problem situations rather than merely manage them, however successfully, once
they have arisen. In marriage and other relationships the economics of prevention
are extraordinary. In health care every dollar spent in prevention saves, by some
estimates, ten in cure. People who develop good nutrition and exercise habits not
only avoid a host of physical complaints but also enjoy energy levels that can be
poured into other life-enhancing activities. But prevention is fundamentally prob-
lematic. If we are good at it, bad things don’t happen. If we get sick, we can see,
touch, and sometimes literally taste cure. But the benefits of prevention are often
invisible. The very materiality of cure makes it more attractive, or at least more no-
ticeable, than prevention. While it’s true that some people thoroughly enjoy a good
workout and glory in making the USDA MyPlate guidelines to nutrition a center-
piece of their eating lives, many others don’t. Prevention is invaluable, but we
must help clients work at making it attractive for themselves.
Counseling provides an opportunity for helping clients embark on the prevention
path. Take the case of Ingrid and Carlos. Four years into their marriage they found
themselves sitting unhappily with a marriage counselor, pointing fingers at each other.
With the help of the counselor they began, painfully, to come to grips with problems
dealing with financial decisions, sexual relations, and child rearing (two children). The
counselor pointed how, over the years, they both had experienced “pinches”—small
annoyances—in their interactions. For instance, Ingrid noticed that Carlos was rather
generous in buying small things for himself, but expressed mild resentment when she
did the same. But she said nothing. On the other hand, Carlos thought that Ingrid at
times was less spontaneous, less “into it,” in their sexual relations, but still resented
it whenever she thought he was giving another woman a second glance. But he said
nothing. The problem was that both of them “saved up” the pinches until they
erupted, or even exploded, into “crunches”—major blowups in their relationship.
And the number of crunches had begun to grow (the original pinch-crunch model is
from Sherwood and Glidewell, 1973, but an Internet search will reveal a number of
variations of this very useful prevention-focused conflict-management model).
The counselor helped clients do three things. First, he helped them diffuse and
manage their most acute problem situation which dealt with child care. Second, he
not only taught them the rudiments of the problem-management and opportunity-
development approach to counseling he was using (the one that is described and
illustrated in this book), but helped them use this process to manage some of the
financial problems they faced. He pragmatically “walked them through” the model
as a way of providing them with a set of skills they could use on their own in the
future. They used the model to deal with financial problems. Third, from a preven-
tion point of view, he helped them see that ignoring or “saving up” pinches almost
inevitably led to crunches. In talking with them separately, he discovered that they
12 Chapter 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

both had a reasonably solid set of communication skills. But, strangely enough,
they did not use these skills when talking with each other. He showed them how
they could use their communication skills to defuse the pinches that creep into
relationships. He made them aware that negotiating is not restricted to country-
to-country relationships or to what Democrats and Republicans do as a last
resort. Rather fair-minded negotiation is part of everyday communal living. The
counselor introduced the clients to resources which they then used.
THE INGREDIENTS OF SUCCESSFUL HELPING
Here we take up the question of the basic factors or elements or ingredients found
in successful helping. Success is defined as life-enhancing outcomes for clients.
While naming and describing each ingredient is important, these ingredients are in-
teractive and dynamic in actual helping encounters. In practice they overlap. The
purpose of this book is to bring them alive through descriptions, examples, and dis-
cussions. The term “common factors” has been used by many helpers and writers
to designate the essential ingredients of successful therapy and, over the past ten
years, a great deal of research has been done to ferret them out (Duncan, 2010,
Duncan, Miller, Wampold, & Hubble, 2010; Norcross, 2011a, 2011b, Wampold,
2010a, 2010b). Even though the elements presented here are for the most part
research-based, they go beyond the “usual” lists. That’s why I use the term “ingre-
dient” rather than “factor.” And so not everyone would agree that the list outlined
here is the right list, developed in the right order, with the right evidence. What
Miller, Hubble, Duncan, and Wampold (2010) say of the common factors is true
of the set of ingredients outlined here. That is, they are “not invariant, propor-
tionally fixed, or neatly additive. Far from it, they are interdependent, fluid, and
dynamic” (p. 34).
I set out the reasoning behind my inclusions and let you and the profession
itself be my judge. But that is currently the nature of the helping industry. The
social sciences deal with human behavior which is often messy, disordered, and
difficult to predict. And so debate, sometimes acrimonious, is part and parcel of
the helping professions. There will always be a degree of uncertainty about the find-
ings of the social sciences. Indeed the place of uncertainty in the helping profession
is discussed later in this chapter. Actually, we have already seen the first ingredient,
the life-enhancing outcomes clients seek. The rest of the ingredients are:
• The client and the contextual factors of the client’s life
• The person of the therapist
• The helping relationship
• The therapeutic dialogue between client and helper
• Two-way feedback between client and helper
• The model or method of treatment and the assumptions behind it
• The standard problem management process as a human universal
• Decision making as a human universal
• The beliefs, values, norms, ethics, and morality that drive human behavior
All of these ingredients, separately or in combination, are useful to the degree that
they contribute to life-enhancing outcomes for the client. The pages of this book are
The Ingredients of Successful Helping 13
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

filled with examples of life-enhancing outcomes. So we turn our attention to the
ingredients that both individually and collectively lead to or produce these outcomes.
Each ingredient will be described here and then explored and illustrated throughout
this book. Let’s start with an overview of a case.
Karl was a veteran of two wars. His first stint was in Iraq, his second in Afghanistan.
His tour in Afghanistan ended abruptly after his squad was ambushed near the
Pakistani border. Two of his best friends were killed. Karl escaped with relatively minor
injuries. Minor physical injuries, that is. When he first returned to base he seemed to be
all right but about a month later the dam broke. Not only did the full range of
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms flood through him off and on—
nightmares, flashbacks, bouts of anxiety and depression, irritability, insomnia, social
avoidance, trouble concentrating, feeling emotionally numb—but he also began
ruminating and agonizing over his pre-military life, especially poor decisions he had
made. For instance, after high school he decided to join the army instead of going to
college. During his first year in the army he broke up with his girlfriend, believing
that “the military and deeper relationships did not mix.” He let himself “drift away
from God.” It’s not that he led an immoral life, rather his “beliefs became twisted.”
This caused feelings of guilt. Early on he was told that all of this was probably only
temporary. But that was not the case. He had his “good days,” but various PTSD
symptoms kept popping up “for no reason at all.” He returned to the US, but on a
sick-leave furlough in his home town found relationships with family and friends
“difficult.” Army doctors decided that he was not fit to continue to serve in the army.
An honorable discharge was arranged. Many of Karl’s symptoms persisted. Some
grew worse. For instance, he began thinking that he could have done something to
prevent the deaths of his friends and this increased the burden of guilt. While he did
not entertain suicidal thoughts, he did wonder about servicemen who had taken their
own lives. How bad could things get? He knew that he could never take his own life,
but he began to understand why people do take their lives. What he saw ahead of
him was a life of misery. He resisted all but intermittent help—“I’m no psycho”—and,
reluctantly and intermittently, took some medication for both anxiety and depression.
Finally, at the urging of a VA Medical Center physician he finally agreed to seek
psychological help—“I’ll try anything.” Well, almost anything. Karl does not want
to get involved with a VA therapist because he wants to distance himself from the
military—“I want to leave all that behind.” He believes that working in a VA
setting would for him be part of the problem rather than part of the solution.
So Karl and Laura, who works in a mental health clinic associated with a Christian
hospital near where Karl lives, become client and helper. Because the hospital is
near an army camp, Laura has seen a number of soldiers, but none with Karl’s
background.
We will continue to review and expand this case as we explore and explain the key
ingredients of successful helping.
T HE CLIENT AND THE C ONTEXTUAL FACTORS OF THE C LIENT’S LIFE
The client in his or her search for life-enhancing outcomes is the first and most
important “ingredient” in the therapeutic process (Bohart & Tallman, 2010).
However, much of therapy research has focused on the model or method of treat-
ment. What clients themselves bring to the party, however substantial, has been
14 Chapter 1
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

shortchanged. This is odd because research shows that clients together with what
they bring to therapy are responsible for most of the success or failure in the help-
ing endeavor (Duncan, 2010; Orlinsky, Rønnestad, & Willutzki, 2004).
What do clients bring to the helping encounter? They arrive with their version
of humanity in all its simplicity and all its complexity. Here are some of the things
clients bring with them, in no particular order:
• The problem situations, issues, concerns, in various degrees of severity, for
which they are seeking help.
• Successful or failed attempts to manage problem situations and/or exploit unused
opportunities.
• The past to the degree that it is affecting them positively or negatively in the
present.
• Their general life expectations and aspirations, however realistic or distorted,
and associated disappointments.
• Their skills, strengths, and resources.
• Their general emotional state.
• Their hopes, fears, and expectations regarding therapy.
• Their degree of openness to and readiness for change.
• Their willingness to work at change.
• Whatever reluctance or resistance they feel.
• Their ability to engage in a collaborative relationship.
• Their sense of right and wrong, their personal ethics, their approach to
morality.
• Their cultural beliefs, values, and norms of behavior, especially their particular
version of their dominant culture and its impact on their behavior.
• The entire range of their relationships together with all the associated ups and
downs, especially the relationships related to their current problem situations.
• Their level of interpersonal communication skills.
• Their blind spots.
• External factors that stand in the way of progress.
• External factors that support constructive change.
This is just a partial list, but all of them are relevant to Karl’s situation. Since
people are complex, it is important for helpers to identify factors that are key
for each client. Or even better, it is important for clients, often with the help of
a therapist, to discover the key factors that have an impact on their problem
situations. In the end the quality of the client’s participation in the therapeutic
endeavor is the major determinant of outcome. So Karl needs a therapist who
can help him give his best to the therapeutic process. Clients are or should be
in the driver’s seat with respect to managing problem situations in everyday
life. It is essential that therapists help them get into the driver’s seat and stay
there throughout the helping process. Therefore, for the reasons outlined by
Duncan and Sparks (2010), if there are any heroes (an over-used and misused
word) in the therapeutic endeavor, they are the clients rather than the therapists.
Karl is responsible for life-enhancing change. His helper is a catalyst for that
change.
The Ingredients of Successful Helping 15
Copyright 2012 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.

T HE PERSON OF THE T HERAPIST
A great deal of research focuses on different kinds of client problems and different
kinds of treatment for these problems. It is the stuff of abnormal psychology. But,
strange to say, over the years relatively little research has been done on the key
capabilities and characteristics of the therapist (Beutler et al., 2004). But we do
know some key things. We know that the person of the therapist is more important
than the method of treatment (Crits-Christoph et al., 1991, 2006; Miller, Hubble,
Duncan, & Wampold, 2010; Wampold & Brown, 2005). We also know that some
therapists are better than others (Okiishi, Lambert, Nielsen, & Ogles, 2003). But the
real question is: What makes some better than others? Wampold (2011), in a review
of what research does say about therapists, comes up with a list of characteristics
which I have adapted. An effective therapist:
• Has a solid set of interpersonal skills and through them expresses acceptance,
warmth, and empathy. These are discussed and illustrated in Part II.
• Acts in such a way as to build trust with clients. “This person understands me.
I believe this person can help me.”
• Does his or her part to develop a collaborative working alliance with clie