



“Carolyn’s words cut through the popular light-washed self-help
and spiritual canon, offering deep soul relief and a celebration
that warmly invites our shadows to be unleashed from clos-
ets shrouded by shame. Beyond soul relief, Carolyn shows us
that our spiritual growth and magical practices can be deeply
fun even in their slimiest iteration. Her skillful way of teaching
ancient tantra and alchemy that we can access without robes,
mantras, or gurus is a gift.”
—Alexandra Roxo, author of
F*ck Like a Goddess: Heal Yourself.
Reclaim Your Voice. Stand in Your Power.
“Elliott, in this evocative debut, encourages the exploration of
taboo desires hidden within the unconscious mind. Elliott uses
the Jungian concept of the shadow to posit that repressed and
denied aspects of oneself manifest in negative ways, and she
moves on to argue that individuals, on an unconscious level, can
enjoy these feelings, and ‘get off’ on the ‘forbidden enjoyment’
they bring to one’s shadow. Her meditation method (existential
kink) is presented as a radical, somatic, hot, immediately practi-
cal and quick method to bring these patterns to light, therefore
dismantling them by tapping into one’s unconscious mind and
soul-spirit realms through meditative and spell-casting prac-
tices. Elliott’s novel methods could help spiritual readers looking
to bring more positivity into their lives.”
—Publishers Weekly
What People Are Saying about Existential Kink

“I have a confession to make. There are some painful stories of
my past that I have held on to for far too long. It never made
sense on the surface. Why would I obsess over these situations?
Why can’t I just let them go? Carolyn Elliott’s Existential Kink
provided the answer that I’ve been searching for all these years:
on some level, I ‘got off’ on these sad stories. Playing martyr felt
good. When I began applying the practices in this book, I was
able to turn around that thinking and release those trauma tales
once and for all. This book will challenge you to look at your
shadow side in a new way. Instead of ignoring it or covering
up the old scars with ‘love and light,’ you’ll learn how to find
power in the darkness. When you do that, a funny thing hap-
pens: you’re free.”
—Theresa Reed, author of Astrology For Real Life:
A No B.S. Guide for the Astro-Curious
“This is shadow integration made practical and completely under-
standable. No one else explains shadow integration in such a way
that it makes solid sense. It can be so difficult to embrace parts
of your being that you’ve been rejecting your entire life let alone
see those parts. But I love that Carolyn finds a way to poetically
and articulately explain why it’s so important and that she teaches
how to do it in simple stages!”
—Akhera Unpa Shepsutera
“It straight up works. The Existential Kink method is effective in
bringing emotions up and out. I finally have a tool that takes the
mystery out of any emotion. Emotions are no longer torturous
devices that stick around forever.”
—Ellen Garbarino

“Existential Kink is such a liberating approach to seeing and fac-
ing my dramas and traumas. The way it twists my victimhood into
strengths, debilitating my blame reactions, is maddening and now
unstoppable. I am facing myself better. I am seeing my self-pity
and reactivity in new light. I am much closer to taking full respon-
sibility for my life. And I am doing all that with a lighter heart and
a lack of self-loathing.”
—Moira Lowe
“I admit that I am still learning to celebrate and ‘get off’ on the
fuckups instead of the old knee-jerk reaction of disappointment.
It’s definitely a mind-twister but oh my god, it is such an exponen-
tially more fun and fulfilling way to go through life!”
—Michelle Lewis









This edition first published in 2020 by Weiser Books, an imprint of
Red Wheel/Weiser, llc
With offices at:
65 Parker Street, Suite 7
Newburyport, MA 01950
www.redwheelweiser.com
Copyright © 2020 by Carolyn Elliott
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from Red Wheel/Weiser, llc. Reviewers may quote brief passages.
ISBN: 978-1-57863-647-1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available upon request.
Cover photograph by Rolfo / Moment / Getty Images
Interior illustrations by Eroshka / Shutterstock
Typeset in Aller Light
Printed in Canada
MAR
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Dedications
To all the participants of my online courses INFLUENCE, FORCE OF
NATURE, MONEY, LOVE, and THRILL—thank you for your depths
of honesty and commitment to this wild work; it’s a beacon and
a joy to me.
To my coven-mates Crystal Woodling, Annie Derek, Angela Morelli,
Carolyn Burns, Alyssa Schlumpf, thank you for all the encourage-
ment, wisdom, strong medicine, and big belly laughs.
To my husband, David Lee Elliott (aka Taia Kepher), thank you for
driving me crazy in all the best, freakiest, and most magical ways.



Contents
Preface: What Is Existential Kink? xiii
Prologue: The Underworld Mystery
(revisited in all its shadow) xix
Part One: Existential Basics 3
An Introduction to the Shadow
(and why it’s such an unconscious turn-on) 5
The Unconscious 15
Lesson 1: Super-Freak Divine Alchemy 23
Lesson 2: The Seven Axioms of Existential Kink 39
Lesson 3: “EK”—The Basic Practice 51
Interlude
Stories of Transformative Experiences 71
Part Two: Getting Kinky 83
Projection 85
Lesson 4: “EK” Exercises for Transformative Magic 89
Interlude
More Stories of Transformative Experiences 167
Part Three: Questions and Answers 179
Appendix 195



xiii
Preface
What Is Existential Kink?
A
provocative title—but what exactly does it mean? Existen-
tial Kink is an amazing, rapid shadow-integration process
that I developed over many years of teaching my courses;
a process that I’ve used again and again to help my coaching cli-
ents and course participants get astounding results. That is what
this book is about—sharing that process with you.
Existential Kink is a specific meditative practice that I teach
that’s all about dissolving negative patterns by being willing to
uncover and celebrate the previously unconscious pleasure that
we actually—paradoxically—derive from those “yucky” patterns.
And to be clear: by negative patterns I mean common trou-
bles like:
• Not being able to make more than a certain smallish
amount of money each month, no matter how hard
you try
• Perpetually dating people who end up bearing an
uncanny resemblance to one of your abusive parents
• Feeling stuck with certain health or weight conditions
• Having intuitive or creative blocks
These are the kinds of things that tend to afflict all of us at some
point, if we’re honest. And if we’re extra, super-honest—honest
on a level below our usual awareness—we all take a freaky, kinky,
sado-masochistic delight in our afflictions, which is why we end
up with them again and again.

xiv e xistential kink
This notion is by no means entirely new. I earned a doctor-
ate in Critical and Cultural Studies at the University of Pittsburgh,
and along the way I read a lot of psychology. My deep dive into
psychology taught me that we human beings have a major habit
of taking unconscious pleasure in the “bad stuff” in our lives.
This was well-known to the founding giants of psychology like
Freud, Jung, and Lacan. Freud called it “psychic masochism,”
Jung recognized it as “the Shadow,” and Lacan called it jouis-
sance—pleasure that’s so intense we repress it.
All of these psychologists recognized that a major compo-
nent of helping people involved getting them to acknowledge
and “own” this kind of weird underlying desire for and pleasure in
stuff that they ostensibly hate and feel very frustrated by.
It’s strange, but it’s true. Jung said—and I’ll repeat it a few
times throughout this book—”Until you make the unconscious,
conscious, it will rule your life and you will call it Fate.”
He was absolutely right about that.
In other words, as long as we have unconscious (repressed,
denied, disowned) enjoyment in some “bad” thing in our lives, we
will keep seeking out that very same “bad” thing; we’ll perpetuate
it without even realizing that we’re doing so.
I learned first-hand that by embracing my “psychic masoch-
ism,” by recognizing and empowering the darkness of my “shadow,”
and in the end taking “pleasure” in my yucky stuff that I could do
something amazing. I could completely integrate my “good” self
with my “bad” self and become a whole person. Healed.
Applying this insight to my own life, I found I rapidly dis-
solved patterns of poverty, bad relationships, and health and cre-
ativity problems that had plagued me for over a decade.
This insight is what’s involved in “shadow work.” And it’s not
for the faint of heart.
However, this insight is rarely discussed in pop psychol-
ogy and self-help books, which tend to focus on “Love & Light”

what is e xistential kink? xv
(repeated affirmations, visualizations, positivity, etc.) and many
people are frustrated when this approach does not produce
results. What I had learned—and what Existential Kink teaches—
is that the key to a magical life rests in delving into the other end
of the spectrum: finding the power of the darkness.
One of my course participants describes it in this perfect
analogy:
I realized that when you only focus on the light and pos-
itive thinking . . . then it’s like you’re staring up at the sun
without looking down to notice that you were standing
in a pile of feces.
Something smells bad, but as long as you stare at the
light then all the bad will go away.
And instead of cleaning up the poo you spray per-
fume (affirmations) all over it.
Meanwhile, shadow work is looking down at the shit so
you can clean it up or even compost it into a lush garden.
The Existential Kink method means looking inside, into the
unconscious, into your fears and triggers and pain, to admit you
actually take freaky joy in standing in that pile of shit.
This is an insight that can be very, very offensive to our egos:
the idea that on some level we could want or enjoy “awful” things
in our lives is scary and troubling to most people.
We tend to think we only want or enjoy “good” things, or that
we should only want “good” things.
But acknowledging our secret bliss in “the bad stuff” doesn’t
have to be a troubling recognition; it’s just a normal part of human
nature. We all do it, and there doesn’t need to be any shame or
blame in it at all.
In fact, setting aside shame and blame is what allows us to
make the enjoyment conscious, and thereby lets us remove its
power to sneakily control us.

xvi e xistential kink
So scary or not, I’m making the argument that this is a very
important insight to integrate into how we live our lives. In fact,
through my online courses, I’ve helped thousands of people dra-
matically turn their lives around by teaching them how to do
this, so it’s a subject dear to my heart. The Existential Kink med -
itation and attitude have done wonders for them, and through-
out this book, you’ll read some stories of their experiences, their
rapid successes, and you’ll recognize the issues as very similar
to your own.
The very good news is, the minute that we’re willing to make
that previously unconscious pleasure a conscious one—-the min-
ute we’re willing to deliberately celebrate it and savor it—we cre-
ate a massive pattern interrupt.
We allow ourselves to finally receive the “dark secret joy”
we’ve been (unbeknownst to ourselves!) seeking.
We let the desire that motivated the negative pattern be fully
known and satisfied, and then we’re free to move beyond it and
create something new.
That’s what this book, Existential Kink, is all about.
In my own life, I have practiced consciously, deliberately
allowing myself to feel those intense sensations, which previ-
ously I had labeled as “anxiety, humiliation,” and I noticed those
feelings came with flushed cheeks and faster heartbeat—arousal.
“Fear is excitement without the breath,” as Fritz Perls said.
Well, often sensations that we experience as terrible or painful
are just pleasure without approval.
I realized, for example, that my poverty gave me arousal. On
a physical level, if I felt that arousal without judging it, it gave me
pleasure.
As Milton said, “The mind is its own place, and in itself can
make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.”
Well, I decided to make a Heaven of my Hell.
The end result turned my life around.

what is e xistential kink? xvii
• • •
Here it’s important to acknowledge that every difficult thing in
life—whether it’s poverty, racism, sexism, or relationship, health,
or creativity issues due to childhood wounds—all of these obvi-
ously are not solely individual inventions. None of us individu-
ally invented these “dark secret desires” for painful things in our
lives, and none of us is individually, solely responsible for the fact
that they exist, or that we experience them. There are things that
go beyond the individual, that are part of the mass “collective
shadow” (as Jung would put it).
For example, the poverty that I experienced for years wasn’t
my single-handed creation. It had to do with systemic, collective
issues of sexism and corporatism, no doubt. But the thing is, me
wailing about sexism and corporatism (which I loved to do, I loved
to go to protests like Occupy and to righteously post on Facebook
about all the injustices affecting me) never did a damn thing to
alter the bare fact of my lack of funds, or my suffering.
Nor did it really alter the situation for anyone else, as far as
I could tell.
The only thing that changed my life was me becoming will-
ing to look at my existential kink: my previously unconscious
desire for what I experienced—to look at it, own it, embrace it,
and accept the jouissance. And this let me become much more
creative, happy, and healthy, and to help others to do the same.
I believe that the same is true for anyone who’s willing to do
this work. You might be up against some very big, very painful soci-
etal or familial setbacks, and yet when you become willing to really
excavate your previously unconscious role in your difficult situa-
tion, you gain exactly the freedom, courage, and creativity that you
need to overcome those setbacks and to even lift up other people.
No one else can grow or heal or have a realization of your
own paradoxical, wonderful kinkiness for you.



xix
Prologue
The Underworld Mystery
(revisited in all its shadow)
T
here’s an ancient Greek story in which the King of the
Underworld, Pluto, kidnaps and rapes the maiden goddess
Persephone. You’re probably familiar with it, but to refresh
your memory, it goes a little something like this:
Young Persephone is hanging out in the meadows picking
flowers one lovely Olympian day and suddenly the earth rips
open under her feet, a menacing man appears, grabs her, takes her
down into the blackness of the Underworld, rapes her, marries her,
and then tricks her into eating pomegranate seeds—Underworld
food—so that she can never totally leave him, and she herself
becomes the Queen of the Underworld.
It’s a sad, awful story of kidnapping, rape, control, violence,
and abuse.
Yet.
For thousands of years it never occurred to anyone in Greece
that there might be a King of the Underworld; there was just a
Queen of the Underworld. Digging down into the most ancient
layer of myth before the Persephone saga, there existed “She
Who Destroys the Light.” Similar to the Hindu goddess Kali, Perse-
phone was worshipped as the Goddess of Death.
So long before there was Pluto, there was Persephone, alone.
Persephone was a maiden goddess in the sense that she was
undivided, complete, whole-unto-herself. She was called Kore,
which means “maiden” but also “core, heart.” She was understood
to be the core, the heart, the essence of everything.

xx e xistential kink
The tale of Pluto and the Rape of Persephone was a later
invention; it came thousands of years after the first celebrations
of the goddess.
What should we make of that?
What I make of it is this:
Pluto is himself an unconscious aspect of the Kore’s (Perse-
phone’s) divinity.
In modern astrology, Pluto represents the Unconscious
Divine: all of those vast forces of death and terror and rape and
evil and destruction and hoarding of wealth. In other words, all
the terrible things in this world that we habitually refuse to iden-
tify with and to take personal responsibility for in order to main-
tain our feeling of being “regular” ego selves.
Pluto also represents the possibility of alchemy itself, the
deliberate, miraculous transformations that become available
when the powers of the Unconscious Divine are recognized,
remembered, embraced, forgiven, loved, and made conscious.
The way I see it, one day the great Kore got bored with being
the solitary, boundlessly powerful ruler of the Underworld.
She decided she wanted some drama to break up the eternal
monotony of being complete-unto-herself, omniscient, and
omnipotent.
So, the Kore split in two: she created a benevolent, sweet,
conscious self and a vicious, unconscious divine twin, Pluto.
She split in order to experience herself as a separate, innocent
individual—a perpetual little girl picking flowers in a meadow—
AND, then to subsequently have the super-edgy, kinky experience
of duality and sexuality and violence and all the terrifying thrills
and chills that come with it.
The Kore desired to experience a great story, and in a great
story, whether comedy or tragedy, there are always struggle and
obstacles and opposition. There are separation and reunion.

the underw orld mystery revisited xxi
From this angle, the Rape of Persephone is the story of the
singular divine choosing to create duality and then having a
horrible, painful experience of itself and then ultimately return-
ing to sovereignty, to union, this time with a self-awareness that
can only come from having experienced itself as terrifyingly
Other.
Pluto is everything we experience as Other (which is to say
“out there” in the great “not me” of the world), that’s too horri-
ble and too vast and sublime and violent to personally identify
with.
In the public version of the Greek myth that has come down to
us through the ages, after being kidnapped by Pluto, Persephone is
ever-after a sad and unwilling Queen of the Underworld. Because
she ate those damned (literally) pomegranate seeds, she can only
spend six months of the year with her mother Demeter in the sunny
fields of Olympus, and the rest of the time she’s sentenced to the
Underworld, surrounded by ghosts, married to her torturer.
This version of the myth isn’t very magically inspiring, how-
ever, is it?
So I think there’s reason to suspect that the “real story” of
the Rape of Persephone, perhaps the one that was revealed to
participants in the Mysteries of Eleusis—the highly secretive,
great magic school of Ancient Greece—is something much closer
to this:
Persephone suffers through her ordeal (kidnap, rape, control)
and then one night, deep in reflection on her miserable fate, she
eats the food of the Underworld, seeds from a pomegranate. When
she eats the seeds, she accepts the Underworld back into herself
(literally ingests it) and remembers that she herself created Pluto
by her own choice in order to experience herself as separate and
innocent. It’s an “aha” moment. As Persephone remembers this,
she sees Pluto in a new light.

xxii e xistential kink
Instead of seeing a cruel monster, she sees a lover so selfless,
so devoted, and so subservient, that he fully played the role of a
malicious villain just because she asked him to. Seeing this, Perse-
phone forgives Pluto and they tenderly unite.
Persephone goes on to reign as Queen of the Underworld,
this time no longer bored and alone, but now with a devoted lover,
and with full awareness of her power and all the responsibility it
entails. This is an awareness that could only come by experiencing
her own power as Other.
The Underworld Mystery is this: Pluto, the Unconscious
Divine, hateful as he seems, is in truth our own creation, a kind
and devoted lover, and that all the vast power of Pluto becomes
available to us when we remember this, forgive him, take respon-
sibility for our own experience of his power (which was really ours
all along), and love him.
We all embody duality—we all have both light (conscious)
and dark (unconscious) dimensions of our being. The dark side
of our personality—the “other,” the shadow side, is dark not only
because we don’t (or won’t) see it; it’s dark because it’s com-
prised of what we would consider our primitive, primal, or neg-
ative impulses—all of which we choose to keep hidden from our
consciousness, and denied. And like Persephone, our goal is to
become whole.
Becoming whole means we recognize our dark, kinky side,
and that we not only accept it, forgive it, and take responsibility
for it, but that we love it, enjoy its antics, and finally integrate it
into our whole being.
And that is the source of true power. That is transformative
magic.





“Until you make the unconscious,
conscious, it will rule your life
and you will call it Fate.”
—Carl Jung
P a r t O n e
Existential Basics



5
An Introduction to the Shadow
(and why it’s such an unconscious turn-on)
W
hat if, deep within you, you had a never-ending reser-
voir of wrongness?
Like, what if deep down inside, everything about
you was totally detestable, dangerous, a source of pain to yourself
and other people?
And what if that was absolutely great?
I’m asking these strange questions because I’ve noticed that
pretty much all of us human beings who aren’t completely enlight-
ened (so: the population of earth minus Eckhart Tolle, Byron Katie,
the Dalai Lama, and some humble shamans who lack PR agents),
all of us feel, at some level, that there’s something unbearably
defi cient, horrible, ugly, and lacking about ourselves that we need
to cover over (to hide, to bury, to run from) and we cover it over
with accomplishment, with the approval of others, or with black
tar heroin.
I feel this sense of shameful wrongness at times. Maybe you
don’t feel it at all. Maybe you’re free—in which case, kudos! You
are very welcome to close this book and go about your enlight-
ened life, my friend. But back to the rest of us living with the afflic-
tion of a nagging sense that we’re “not okay” . . .
This awful “not okay” feeling can be exacerbated by just about
anything: a grouchy tone from our partner, a withering look from
our boss, the news that our high school nemesis just won the Pulit-
zer Prize. Many of us are able to keep this repulsive, monstrous feel-
ing of shameful inadequacy out of sight and out of mind in order to
go about the business of being relatively functional adults.

6 e xistential kink
Yet a significant number of folks find it necessary to numb
and hide this sense of wrongness by using every available form
of addiction—from social media to workaholism to porn to alco-
hol and drugs—all to keep it shushed up. Some other folks are
just completely taken over and paralyzed by their awareness of
the wrongness. Among these we might count those with severe
depression or other mental illness. Some end up committing
suicide.
Even those in the “functional adult” camp with relatively
mild addictive tendencies often find that despite their best
efforts and intentions, dark patterns repeat in their lives. And
repeat. Maybe these functional adults have plenty of happy, ful-
filling things going on in their lives but they can’t ever seem to
make more than a certain amount of money each month, or over
and over again they choose intimate partners who bear a strik -
ing resemblance to their abusive parent. Somehow, one way or
another, for the majority of us humans—whether it’s through our
addictions or through our lousy patterns, our hidden sense of
wrongness makes itself felt.
So a question arises: what the fuck are we gonna do about this?
I say: let’s transmute that feeling of “wrongness” into raw, hot,
glorious power.
Let me tell you a little story.
When I was in my twenties, I spent a lot of time sitting in
moldy church basements in my hometown of Pittsburgh, Penn-
sylvania, listening to people talk about surrendering to God. As
it happens, I was not, at that time, a dedicated basement-loving
Christian; I was a misfit attending 12-step groups to help me
recover from heroin addiction.
I was doing this whole recovery thing while also going to
school to get a doctorate in Critical and Cultural Studies. Getting a
doctorate in Critical and Cultural Studies entails reading an awful

part one: e xistential basics 7
lot of weird existential philosophy, like the works of Kierkegaard
and Heidegger and Nietzsche and Sartre. As I listened every night
at my 12-step meetings to dozens of stories of devastation and
redemption in the mildew-y air, I also thought about my own pain-
ful life experiences. As a little child, I was molested by a man I
dearly loved—so that was a real head-trip which eventually made
narcotics seem like a GREAT idea. And as I listened to these peo -
ple “let go and let God,” one distinct thought gradually formed in
my mind:
God is one kinky-ass motherfucker.
God—the divine—whatever He/She/IT is—creates this world,
and this world is a gonzo horror show of war and rape and abuse
and addiction and disaster.
If God is running the show, God must like it this way!
Now, you might guess that a thought like that would lead to
some kind of terrible nihilistic breakdown. But for me . . . actually,
it didn’t. Instead, it made me smile—perversely—and gave me a
feeling of lightness, play, and possibility. Because I had also stum-
bled upon this further thought: maybe I’m one freaky-ass mother-
fucker too! What if—seriously what if—all the bad stuff had man-
ifested in my life because I like it that way?
Here is a profound example.
At the time, I was in a physically abusive relationship with
a jealous, controlling guy. I had met this guy through a Craigslist
personal ad because I was having such a tough time finding some-
one to date. (Yes, I know how that sounds. Yes, it was that bad, and
yes, I was that messed up.) I knew the relationship was damaging
and crazy and dangerous, but I just couldn’t seem to let it go. I
would break up with the guy, send him packing, and then call him
with a seductive phone call the next day.

8 e xistential kink
Then he’d come back, there’d be some nice kissing, and within
minutes we’d be back to yelling and he’d be throwing things at me
(coffee mugs, books, etc.).
I hated how controlling and violent my partner was.
And yet, after much inquiry and reflection, I realized I actually
loved how controlling and violent he was.
Loved, loved, loved it. I adored the feeling of being important
that came from having this guy treat me like I was a supply of her-
oin that he had to manage in order to have it available at all times.
In other words, my existence had meaning.
Just as in the tale of Persephone and Pluto, I could use him to
keep me contained, so that I didn’t have to risk exploring myself
or the world without him.
Part of what kept me hooked into the relationship was the
joy of resenting him and his controlling violence. Another part of
what kept me hooked in was the feeling that I could only have
this terrible relationship because I was terrible, and if I could
just become un-terrible, then I could leave him. But as long as I
was terrible, I might as well stay with him, because even though
he’s possessive and violent, he’s more entertaining than being
alone. So I tried to become an un-terrible person, but that didn’t
work. The very act of trying to be un-terrible generally makes
one more certain that one is terrible.
This scenario I’ve described is a looney type of bondage,
a system of imposed constriction, which I had been using to
keep myself from facing the great unknown. It finally occurred
to me that the logic of “I can only get this terrible relationship
because I am terrible” was not true. Rather the following reali-
zation was true:
I have this terrible relationship because my unconscious
secretly likes feeling maniacally controlled by an evil outside
agency.

part one: e xistential basics 9
As I let the realization sink in that the ugliness in my life
was there not because it was somehow necessary or true but
just because a shadowy part of me liked it—a giant space
opened up in my body. I allowed myself to consciously feel
the previously unconscious pleasure I felt in being violently
controlled. It was in fact a previously unconscious turn-on. My
“aha” moment.
Turn-on is magnetic. Now I was faced with the stark realiza-
tion that I had been unconsciously magnetizing abuse and scar-
city and rejection to myself all my life.
It occurred to me that I had been unconsciously enjoying and
magnetizing self-devaluation for years, but I had never before let
myself know it because it’s a shameful, freaky, weird thing to be
turned on by devaluation and scarcity in real life.
I mean, in sophisticated circles it’s totally cool to be turned
on by devaluation in some spicy S&M bedroom scene—but in real
life? That’s just fucked up.
And then it dawned on me: Shit, I don’t just have bedroom
kink, I have existential kink. I have perverse desires for pain and
bondage in my daily existence.
So in my desperate twenties, in that mildew-y basement,
among those sharing and willing to let God take the responsibility
for all the pain, sadness, and fucked-up-ness of their lives, I came
up with the following thought:
Well if God is a kinky freak and I’m a part of God like all these
“spiritual” people say, maybe deep down I’m a kinky freak too.
And maybe I can get more in touch with my divine nature by
giving myself permission to like all the scary stuff in life, instead of
just resenting it.
This realization—embracing my existential kink—became the
foundation of a long inquiry into the nature of consciousness and

10 e xistential kink
divinity and creation that is the source of all the immense good
things in my life today.
And in my life today there are many very good things. A truly
loving, hot husband. A seven-figure business. World travel. A cir-
cle of genuine friends. An ever-growing spiritual connection. An
insane level of beauty and bounty that sometimes still staggers
me, given I came from a childhood of poverty, molestation, and
addiction. (And yes, in my life today there’s also still a goodly
share of self-created pain and suffering—because at times I still
enjoy the drama of generating that suffering for myself—but I’m
able to recognize it for what it is.)
My exploration of what I call my Existential Kink has changed
my life.
This book is the result of that exploration. I wrote it because
I want as many other people as possible to experience the kind
of huge turnaround in life and spirit that I’ve experienced through
embracing Existential Kink. And wealth. Did I mention wealth? I
want you to have lots of genuine wealth. And romance. And com-
munity. All the “good stuff” in life.
In order to transmit to you the state of awareness that is Exis-
tential Kink, I’m going to need to take you down some immensely
strange corridors of the psyche. I humbly ask that you pay close
attention to the stories and anecdotes that I have to share with
you from my own life and from the lives of my clients as they help
bring this work to life.
I promise you, every moment of attention that you give to this
book will be amply and exponentially rewarded by transformation
in your own life.
Existential Kink has the power to vastly transform your life for
the way-better, perhaps more than any other information that you
will ever encounter.
Many of my clients have doubled or tripled their incomes,
found the true loves of their lives, rejuvenated marriages worn

part one: e xistential basics 11
out by resentment, healed chronic health conditions, discovered
a deep sense of comfort in their own skins, and broken through
ancient creative blocks. And I’ll be sharing excerpts from their
real-life stories of transformation throughout this book.
Sound a bit too good to be true?
Well, stick with me kid, ‘cause I’m about to greatly expand
your definition of how good “true” can be.
You see, what I’ll be sharing with you here is Existential Kink,
a radical, somatic, hot, and eminently practical & quick method of
coming to love the previously hidden and shamed parts of your
own self, so that your old negative patterns dissolve.
Those hidden and shamed parts? That’s your shadow. And in
the course of this book, you’ll meet your shadow and learn how
to dance with it.
When you do this work, when you integrate your shadow,
you become much more capable of receiving big beauty and
big bounty in your life because you’re no longer accidentally,
unknowingly rejecting it.
This is magic.
The magical worldview is this: As above, so below. As within,
so without.
This means: reality is fractal and holographic. Tiny changes
that you make within yourself can have dramatic effects in the
“external” world because you and the “external” world are not
truly separate. In other words, magic is possible because of the
fractal and holographic nature of reality. When you change
something “small” within yourself or your immediate environ-
ment, you automatically change something very “large”—the
whole world.
This means that we are never not doing magic. We are always
doing magic, we are always exerting influence. It’s just that habit-
ually, humans tend to do magic that’s either just plain boring or
destructive (there’s that shadow again).

12 e xistential kink
But the world is not separate from your psyche. They’re
part of one solid continuum, one solid weaving. Mastering prac-
tical magic involves learning what changes in yourself and your
environment correspond to changes in the “outer” world of your
experience.
Existential Kink has such transformative power because it
deals with the integration of the conscious and the unconscious
minds, in a cutting-edge, rapid way.
Why does integrating the conscious and the unconscious
minds matter so much?
Because, as the pioneering psychotherapist Carl Jung (who
was building on the insights of his mentor, Sigmund Freud) discov-
ered, our conscious minds and identities (that is, the people we
usually imagine ourselves to be) are just the very tippy tiny top of
the immense underwater icebergs of our actual psychic totalities.
And oh, what giant, gnarly icebergs we all are!
The basic formula for profound alchemical change is solve et
coagula, which means: to first utterly dissolve (solve) an existing
form and then to carefully bring the dissolved and purified ele-
ments together again (coagula) in a whole new, more potent and
finely organized, permutation.
Caterpillars, which completely dissolve wholly into goo inside
their cocoons and then re-coagulate themselves into butterflies,
provide a fantastic example of how this kind of alchemical change
happens in nature. The English word psyche, meaning “soul” or
“mind,” comes from the Greek word psyche, meaning butterfly.
Coincidence? I suspect not. Human souls, like butterflies, start out
as wormy incipient forms that need to be dissolved and re-formed
before our full glory can emerge.
Many self-help and popular magic books (for example, Law
of Attraction stuff) focus heavily on the coagula phase of the solve
et coagula formula.

part one: e xistential basics 13
Visualizing, praying, affirming, spell-casting, making vision
board collages, creating sigils, charging crystals, doing loving-
kindness meditation . . . all of these are well-known, time-tested,
and effective means of coagulating (“manifesting” as it were) a
new reality into existence. The only hitch is that the brighter we
turn up the lights, the darker the shadows become.
All of the aforementioned popular “vibration raising” prac-
tices have a way of brightening the light in our being, which tends
to intensify and sharpen the presence of our latent darkness.
So if one has not done solve processes on the underlying
unconscious shadow patterns, desires, qualities, and beliefs that
created sucky situations in your life to begin with—then all the
visualizing and affirming in the world can only bring you shells
of outwardly changed circumstances, sans genuinely satisfying
fulfillment.
Perhaps this shallowness has been your experience, as it was
mine, with your previous attempts at “manifestation.” If one has
not done sufficient solve, one is likely to become frustrated and
lose enthusiasm (if one is anything like me) for magic and mani-
festation when results do not turn out as hoped.
Existential Kink will bring you in touch with the solve part of
the equation: the dissolving, the uncovering, and ultimately, the
embracing of your kinky-ass shadow.
What is your existential kink?
Have you met your shadow?
You see, when a person does not know how to become con-
scious of their own vast unconscious (and most people haven’t
the faintest idea of how to do this), they tend to be controlled by
it, meaning their lives are dominated and limited by stubborn and
painful patterns kept in motion by their disowned unconscious
desires . . . which is something that no amount of visualizing or
affirming can fix.

14 e xistential kink
As Jung emphasized: “Until you make the unconscious, con-
scious, it will rule your life and you will call it Fate.”
But Jung also pointed out: “One does not become enlight-
ened by imagining figures of light, but by making the darkness
conscious.”
That’s exactly what this here lil’ self-help book is all about:
we’re not here to imagine figures of light; we’re here to make the
darkness conscious, in a fun, fast, and kinky way.

15
The Unconscious
J
ung’s observation that “Until you make the unconscious, con-
scious, it will rule your life and you will call it Fate” means that
your unconscious desires and curiosities have great power to
shape your experience.
It’s tricky: After all, these deep shadowy desires and curios-
ities of yours are unknown and unconscious (meaning: you are
not knowingly aware of them, so they do not seem like they are
yours at all!). Yet these taboo, disowned, and repressed desires do
tend to get fulfilled in your life. When this happens, because these
taboo desires of yours have been disowned and repressed, you
won’t recognize their fulfillments as fulfillments. Instead these
fulfillments of your deepest desires will often seem to your con-
scious mind like awful calamities. Thus it tends to seem like some
agency outside of you—some call it cruel Fate—is making bad
stuff happen to poor lil’ ole you.
Consider the case of a young man in his twenties, Alex, who
has a deep desire to experience himself as “taken care of.” Maybe
he never got to fully experience himself as taken care of as a little
child, so the unmet need is still within him. But Alex’s desire isn’t
socially acceptable for a man his age.
Thus, the desire to be dependent and “taken care of” is taboo
and so it gets repressed into his unconscious. It’s so far outside
his awareness that he doesn’t even know that this desire is within
him, and he very well might not believe you if you told him.
Alex consciously desires what he’s been told he “should”
want: that is to be independent and autonomous and have a cool
career. So Alex visualizes and affirms success, works on being

16 e xistential kink
upbeat and “high-vibe” and he gets a hip, respectable job after he
graduates college. But in a few months, despite Alex’s best inten-
tions, his unconscious gets the better of him and he “accidentally”
gets fired from the job. Now he can’t pay rent on his own, and so
he has to go live with his parents again.
To his conscious mind, this feels to him like a huge failure,
humiliation, and calamity.
To his unconscious, this is a giant victory and a great fulfill-
ment of the deep underlying desire—his desire to want to be taken
care of.
Unconsciously, Alex is enjoying living with his parents and
being taken care of. The ironic thing is: as long as Alex resists
allowing himself to consciously experience his job loss and
his being “taken care of” by his parents as a great victory and
fulfillment (in other words, as long as he resists consenting to
experience it as kinkily awesome the very same way his uncon-
scious experiences it), then the more he will feel out-of-control
and cursed by Fate.
As long as Alex refuses to consciously enjoy his circumstance,
he’ll be inclined to see himself as a loser and a failure, he’ll lose
confidence, and he’ll stay stuck.
Paradoxically, the moment Alex becomes willing to “get on
the side” of his taboo unconscious desire for dependence and
goes ahead and deeply savors its victory—at that moment he
can feel empowered again. He can realize that his taboo wish to
be dependent has been fulfilled, and let himself receive the hot
weird pleasure of that.
Then, rather than being a loser, Alex is actually a massively
fulfilled person. From this vantage point of deciding to con-
sciously allow himself to enjoy and be satisfied by his previously
unconscious pleasure, it’s then much easier for him to go ahead
and make his way in the world. In essence, he’s no longer guilty;

part one: e xistential basics 17
he’s not beating himself up anymore. He’s no longer resisting his
situation, so it doesn’t need to persist.
This young man’s enjoyment of his “failure” and “depen-
dence” and state of “being taken care of” might seem perverse,
weird.
And indeed, of course, it is.
Yet it’s precisely in this perverse, weird, and shameless enjoy-
ment of his sucky situation that the transformation of his life and
the liberation of his energies lie. Alex has taken the dark and here-
tofore unconscious pleasure of his shadow and brought it into the
light.
There are many, many such unconscious patterns that affect
our tender caterpillar lives, but here’s a handy list of several com-
mon examples. See if you can recognize any of these patterns
from your own life or from the lives of your friends and family
members:
• Only being able to earn a certain amount of money each
month, no matter how hard or how much you work
• Only being attracted to partners who turn out to bear
an uncanny resemblance to your asshole dad (or to your
asshole mom, or to the first person who broke your heart,
or whatever)
• Hearing the mean voice of your third-grade teacher in
your head whenever you sit down to create, so you avoid
creating
• Overeating (or overindulging in drugs, alcohol, etc.) to
cover up feelings of guilt, shame, loneliness, frustration
that seem endless
• Disliking yourself/your body no matter what your shape

18 e xistential kink
• Perpetually feeling victimized and like your life would
be good if only rude other people (your family, your
boss, your spouse, your employees, the government, the
blacks, the gays, the straights, the whites, the Jews, the
Christians, the capitalists, the hippies, etc., etc.) would
stop messing with you
• Having grand plans for the future, but never getting
around to taking the first concrete steps to realizing those
plans
• Being very sensitive and taking everything personally
• Habitually seeking approval, doing things to get people
to like you even when you don’t really want to do those
things
• Picking a fight with your partner just when everything
starts getting really good
You get the idea.
None of these patterns are original in the least. Literally bil-
lions of us humans suffer from them. They’re all passed down
from family and culture, the delectable inheritances of trauma,
guilt, and shame. They’re very, very repetitive and predictable.
Most all of us have at least a few of these patterns in opera-
tion, and most people never manage to shift their sticky patterns
at all. The majority of folks aren’t even willing to acknowledge that
they’re in the grips of a pattern and therefore are not truly in con-
trol of their own lives—indeed, such an idea is very threatening
to the ordinary ego.
If you doubt this, just think of how many people you know
who are stuck in relationships or careers or mindsets that aren’t
working. From the outside, you can see that if only they took a
few simple steps they could change their whole world, but they

part one: e xistential basics 19
don’t take those steps—they won’t take those steps. Why? They’re
being ruled by their unconscious, and the foul scenes that they
themselves are creating and perpetuating just seem to them to
be their unwelcome Fate.
Dissolving unconscious patterns by making them conscious
(and thereby integrating your being, your will) allows you to wake
up out of this powerlessness and become the captain of the ship
of your own life.
Once you do this kind of solve work on your unconscious,
then the well-known methods of visualization, affirmation,
spell-casting, and so forth, work quite beautifully, and with far
less frustration.
Up to now this kind of waking up has been a relatively rare
feat among us humans. Some individuals have achieved it through
decades of psychotherapy, and some have done it through a sim-
ilarly long period of sitting meditation.
What this book proposes is a different method—the “EK”
method—a method for rapidly making the unconscious, con-
scious—so that your unconscious desires and curiosities no lon-
ger rule you. When that happens, a huge vista of possibility opens
up in your life.
This method of integration works within days, weeks, and
months rather than within years and decades. Why? Because Exis-
tential Kink doesn’t just identify your shadow self. Existential Kink
teaches you to embrace and love your shadow self.
Consider: the unconscious rules not only our night-time
dreams, but to a great extent (a far, far greater extent than is
comfortable for us to acknowledge)—it also rules the patterns,
desires, and curiosities that shape our waking experience.
Our day-to-day waking experience is also a kind of dream—
more dense and more slow-moving than our nighttime dreams,
yes, but still a dream nonetheless.

20 e xistential kink
When we know how to consciously, deliberately work with
the contents of the unconscious, we gain an amazing degree
of control over our waking lives—just as a lucid dreamer gains
remarkable control over their night-time dreams by first becoming
conscious that they are asleep and dreaming.
This work of becoming profoundly, skillfully lucid and
empowered in the dream of daily waking life is what I have to
share with you here.
Once you stop feeling alienated, as “other” from your shadow,
you will start feeling powerful.
This book presents a life-altering shadow integration med-
itative practice that invites us to make conscious the uncon-
scious pleasure that we take in the stuck, painful patterns of
our lives. Through consciously enjoying and giving approval to
these previously unconscious “guilty pleasures,” we interrupt
and end the stuck patterns so that we can get what we really
want in our lives.
I should mention that Existential Kink, while fresh, is not
entirely without precedent. Throughout all schools of tantric
gnosticism (Hindu, Buddhist, and in the Western Esoteric tradi-
tion), there’s an emphasis on learning how to stay present in high
sensation. By “high sensation” I mean both intense physical feel-
ings like pain and pleasure—and also intense emotional feelings,
like anger, fear, and lust.
Tantrikas therefore traditionally meditate on intensely
charged subject matter like sex and death, and focus on learning
how to transmute the raw energies of emotion and instinct (espe -
cially sex and aggression) into the luminosity of free awareness.
The fundamental tantric idea is that it’s important to work
with the strong energies of attraction and aversion, pleasure
and pain, to facilitate awakening, rather than avoiding them.
Why? Because avoiding desire, aggression, and socially taboo

part one: e xistential basics 21
experience doesn’t help; avoidance only deepens the trap of
aversion and attachment, which causes the wheel of illusion to
keep spinning.
Likewise, in Existential Kink we focus on delving into taboo
territories of our unconscious minds and learn to stay present
with the high sensation there, in a way that transmutes the previ-
ously-stuck energy into free awareness.



Lesson 1
Super-Freak Divine Alchemy
(On How God Is One Kinky-Ass Motherfucker,
and the Magical Implications Thereof)
This lesson includes:
• Godself Kink
• The Great Work
• The Vast Self
• Making Your Fate
• On Spell-casting
• A Basic Concept
• The Spirit
• The Sexual Process of Magic

24 e xistential kink
Godself Kink
Let’s return to a point mentioned in the Introduction: if the ancient
wisdom of Vedas are correct and the whole universe is just God
playing elaborate rounds of hide’n’seek with Godself, then God is
a super-freak.
We need only look around our planet to see that God’s idea
of a fun time includes some seriously edgy, ultra-taboo, hard-
core stuff—including war and poverty and pain and ravaging and
abuse and atrocities of all variety.
That’s a whole lot of sadism and masochism, dominance and
submission, bondage and torture—in both extreme and subtle
forms—that God enjoys playing out with Godself.
I propose that all our suffering and stuckness in life comes
from forgetting that we’re divine sparks playing a wild kinky
game and that great miracles can come forth in our lives when
we reverse the process of forgetting by deliberately reclaiming
the pleasure of the game—not just in our minds, but in our hearts
and genitals.
I acknowledge this might be difficult to accept, especially
after two thousand years of Christianity insisting on a God that’s
wholly “good” (who, nonetheless, is constantly, mysteriously
counterbalanced by a powerful evil Devil).
But it simply stands to reason that if we want to consciously
embody our whole divine inheritance and become true magicians,
to become people who are capable of attaining our most mean-
ingful aims and experiencing bountiful fulfillment, healing, and
love in our daily lives, then we need to wake ourselves up in the
midst of this great freaky game, by savoring it, enjoying it, grieving
exquisitely for it, getting off on it . . . just like God does.
When we do this, we become lucid in the dream of waking
life, capable of executing marvels. We become undeniably, tangi-
bly aware of the divine presence, the spark of Godself within us.

part one: e xistential basics 25
We start to perceive our lives from the perspective of the divine
curiosity within us, instead of from our grasping egos.
Our inner divinity ceases to be a sweet, comforting New
Age idea and instead becomes a tangible, electrifying, felt real-
ity. When we do this work, we put into concrete application the
famous alchemical dictum from the Emerald Tablet: “As above, so
below; as within, so without.” It’s easy to give lip service to that
dramatic notion of cosmic correspondence which is at the heart of
a magical worldview, but it’s a whole other thing to actually live it.
This “living it” bit is the essence of Existential Kink.
Consider this: our conscious selves (the selves who we usu-
ally take ourselves to be) definitely do not want all the “bad stuff”
of life. In other words, our conscious selves (otherwise known
as “egos”) believe that instead of failure, humiliation, poverty,
illness, rejection, and sadness, we would much rather have wins,
success, wealth, health, romance, joy, and so forth. But as the Bud-
dha observed, “All sentient beings want to be happy; and all sen-
tient beings suffer.” In other words, it seems that in life we often
end up getting the opposite of what we say we want. And, as Holly-
wood celebrities well know, it’s possible to “have everything”—all
the good stuff of the world, and still be totally, pathetically, wildly
miserable.
So what gives? Clearly something nasty is going on here.
I’d offer the following explanation: as humans, our whole
selves are always reflections of the divine totality (“As above, so
below; as within, so without”). We are microcosmic reflections of
the total holy macrocosm, and as such, we are each innately curi-
ous about and desirous for the full spectrum of potential experi-
ence, both the painful and the pleasurable, the evil and the good,
the ugly and the beautiful.
Really let this sink in for a minute.
And contrary to some airy Law of Attraction notions, we rarely
get what we consciously want (unless we do the kind of deep

26 e xistential kink
solve work addressed in this book), but we always get what we
unconsciously want.
And if you’re curious as to what you unconsciously want, you
don’t need thirty years of psychoanalysis to figure it out: you can
just take a look at what you currently have in your life and know
that that’s exactly what your unconscious wants, because what
your unconscious wants, it gets. This is something we’ll discuss
more in a bit.
As long as we insist that we absolutely don’t want dark,
freaky, unpleasant things, a major part of our full-spectrum
human curiosity gets cut off, repressed, denied, and made
unconscious. And this is bad news bears, because desire-curiosi-
ties in the unconscious have much, much more power to become
manifest in material reality than our conscious, “good,” ego-ap-
proved desires do.
We need to learn how to own up to the darker side of our
human curiosity and take such deep, shameless responsibility for
it, and admit that we are willing to enjoy its challenging manifes-
tations. If we do not own up, then we are likely to stay stuck in the
same cycle of unconscious creation of scary stuff. Let’s pause and
consider the relation of what we’re talking about to another, very
grand idea—the Great Work of Alchemy.
The Great Work
The work of becoming a magical force of nature is very much con-
nected to what the alchemists called the Great Work. Now don’t
get too alarmed when I tell you this, but the process of the Great
Work is identical to the process of enlightenment (also known
as individuation, awakening, initiation, or “becoming whole”).
In short, it’s the process of coming to viscerally identify less as
a sorry, isolated individual and more and more as a wave in the

part one: e xistential basics 27
ocean of God. While this is a very lofty endeavor, the pursuit of it
also yields many tangible rewards.
As we grow in the Great Work, our consciousness evolves and
integrates, and when our consciousness changes in this way, we
become much more capable of seeing and acting upon beautiful
worldly opportunities for fulfillment.
Indeed, for myself I’ve found in this process there’s often a
repeated fairy tale sense of “veils being lifted” and the realization
that what I wanted was “there all along” for the taking. I just was
too blind or dull to notice it before.
The first major stage of the Great Work was known to alche-
mists as the unio mentalis, the creation of a unified mind.
It’s important to note that “mind” in this alchemical sense
does not just mean the ordinary thinking mind: it means unity
within your own being, your thoughts, your emotion, and your will.
We might say it’s more like a “unified mentality” or “unified atti-
tude.” The symbol of the unio mentalis would be a high-powered,
whole heart.
The unio mentalis is a being that is not in conflict with itself;
it’s undivided and thus is extremely powerful. The unio mentalis
phase of the Great Work is what we’re dealing with here in this
book.
It’s important to note that the unio mentalis isn’t just nice to
have for mystical reasons—it’s also highly pragmatic. The unio
mentalis is synonymous with having “a united will,” what ancient
Greek thaumaturgists considered the absolute precondition to
effective practical magic, or, in other words, the deliberate gener-
ation of positive synchronous experiences.
The second major stage of the Great Work was called the
unus mundus, or “one world,” and it’s an expansion of unity. It’s
the condition of your soul-spirit being so seamlessly incarnate
and at one with the world that you can do things like walk on

28 e xistential kink
water, or turn into a rainbow of light when you die, leaving behind
only your hair and fingernails.
I’m still working on figuring that bit out.
But even though the unio mentalis isn’t as grand as sponta-
neously combusting into a giant rainbow or literally turning water
into wine, it still brings you much further along in the process of
the Great Work than most people will ever go. Plus, achieving
the unio mentalis tends to be a precondition for figuring out how
to get to the unus mundus. In other words, unless you’re united
within your own heart-mind, you’re unlikely to find the path to
embodied unity with all reality.
In the Western Esoteric tradition popularized in the twenti-
eth century by the Golden Dawn and Aleister Crowley, reaching
the unio mentalis corresponds to something called “gaining the
Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel” or the
K&C of the HGA for short. It’s important to note that while the
Holy Guardian Angel is often experienced as a distinct, autono-
mous “person”—as an “Other” within the psyche, like the Anima/
Animus—it’s also often met as an intuitive understanding of pro-
found, nonlocal, and nonlinear connection.
This first unio mentalis stage of the Great Work that we’re
concerned with here involves healing the disconnect between our
ideals, intentions, and inspirations (our spirit, the “masculine” or
“projective” part of our being) and our embodied, emotional, sex-
ual, creative energy (our soul, the “feminine” or “receptive” part of
us, which is also the part of us that gets fertilized and “gives birth”
to synchronous experiences in the outer world).
Why does this matter?
Because most of us are walking around with terribly divided
wills, and thus a weakened ability to fulfill our true potential.

part one: e xistential basics 29
The Vast Self
Consider this: on a soul-spirit level we’re each grand cosmic her-
maphrodites, endlessly self-fertilizing. Our spirit and our soul are
both elements of the larger divine Self that we are. The higher Self
that we are is unconscious in most human beings and so, as we’ve
mentioned, it speaks mostly in dreams and through the manifes-
tation of events (i.e. “synchronicities”).
When you begin to experience communications from the
total Self not solely through dreams and synchronicities but as
direct “knowing” within your own waking awareness, that’s called
the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel in
the Western Esoteric tradition, which is also known as relating
consciously to your inner Other (Anima/Animus), a process which
Jung referred to as “the masterwork of individuation.”
We could venture to guess that the vast Self is unconscious in
most modern human beings because we all seem to have a strong
interest in experiencing ourselves as separate, alienated egos, lit-
tle isolated particles who exist at the mercy of cruel fate and out-
side circumstance. Think about it: if the Self contains everything,
then the way to experience yourself as separate is to identify
yourself with only one side of a polarity and to disdain the other
side, to pretend it’s “soooooooo not you.”
Voila! As soon as you’ve done this creative pretending, you’ve
(temporarily, fictionally) created an ego self that’s apparently sep-
arate from the whole Self. To maintain this fictional sense of sep-
aration, the ego-personality that we take ourselves to be harshly
judges, disowns, and denies huuuuuuge parts of our actual being,
thus rendering them “unconscious” and creating the personal and
collective shadow.
We refer to this work as “shadow integration,” but it’s also
just “Self integration.” The Self includes all archetypes, all gods

30 e xistential kink
and daimons. Integrating the “naughty stuff” in what we call the
shadow is just one part of relating to the previously unconscious
Self, which includes the whole of our unconscious divinity.
Making Your Fate
Let’s revisit that incredibly important observation by Carl Jung
that I mentioned earlier:
“Until you make your unconscious, conscious, it will rule your
life and you will call it Fate.”
In other words, the emotions and desires and positions that
our ego disowns inevitably haunt us (personally and collectively)
by generating painful synchronous experiences that urge us to
confront and reintegrate the disdained side of a polarity. This is
what Jung’s predecessor, Sigmund Freud, called “the return of the
repressed.”
Polarities include all sets of “opposites”—masculine and
feminine, fire and ice, night and day, violence and healing, cre-
ation and destruction, good and evil, fulfillment and deprivation,
power and powerlessness, etc.
Let me give you an example: most of us have grown up in a
society that exalts wealth, and we have disowned and denied the
other side of the polarity: a love of scarcity. In doing so we make
our love of scarcity unconscious, and thus scarcity synchronously
shows up in our lives, until we agree to consciously, deliberately,
“insanely,” shamelessly love it.
The Great Work involves making the unconscious, conscious
and thus changing the locus of our agency and taking charge of
our own fate.
To change the locus of your agency means to stop aligning
yourself with your ego’s one-sided choices (the ego tends to want
only what it labels “the good stuff”) and to instead align yourself
with the kinkier, more adventurous choices of the underlying total

part one: e xistential basics 31
divine presence that we all are: the strange, vast Self which enjoys
and is very curious about absolutely everything.
To do this, we have to greatly humble our ego’s denial and
fictional (if we were feeling feisty we might even say delusional)
sorting of all experience into “good” (what appears to benefit
me) and “bad” (what appears to not benefit me). When we suc-
ceed in this, the ego loses layers of its absorption in the fiction
of separation, and comes more and more to see itself as just
a particular (rather funny) expression of a much larger divine
whole, the Self.
The Self with a capital “S” is the primal Selfhood of every-
thing and everyone, which is (paradoxically) also our own real
inner selfhood. This is so because the Self is infinite conscious-
ness. It’s as if all of us humans are light bulbs, and the Self is the
electricity that powers us. In becoming more identified with this
underlying whole that we share with everyone, we paradoxically
become more uniquely individual because we become free of our
attachment to conventional, socially prescribed roles.
In waking up out of our absorbing fiction of separation, we
link up the gigantic sexual, taboo, electrical energy (the shakti,
the turn-on) in our bodies with our most inspired ideals and inten-
tions. Then our ideals and our intentions gain the high-voltage
electric “oomph” that they’ve been previously missing.
The more you fulfill the Great Work, the better you get at
actual, material manifestation in the world.
The Basque word for witch, sorginak, means “one who makes
her own fate.” What I’m presenting to you here is a way to make
your own fate: a witchy, tricksy, feminine path to enlightenment
that’s quite a bit different than the more publicly vaunted, mas -
culine routes of asceticism, contemplation, and yogic saintliness.
The witchy path of the Great Work involves learning to get
off on (and thus to tangibly, viscerally reintegrate) the darkest,
scariest dimensions of ourselves and our existence. It’s a sexual,

32 e xistential kink
worldly, orgasmic, ecstatic path which bears a good deal in com-
mon with Hindu and Buddhist tantric traditions. To be completely
blunt, this Existential Kink work is the left-hand path. The left-
hand path is also known as “the lightning path” because it wakes
you up very quickly (quick as lightning) and it destroys who you
think you are (lightning torches what it hits).
Sounds exciting, yes?
On Spell-casting
To cast a spell is to communicate with your personal unconscious
and the collective unconscious in a way that generates specific
results through synchronicity. Believe it or not, you are casting
spells at every single moment. Your words, your actions, the looks
you give yourself in the mirror and the looks you give to other
people. Your clothes. Your perfume. Your songs. Your smiles. Your
laughter. Your reactivity and resentment. All spells.
You constantly communicate with your own individual
unconscious and with the collective unconscious. You constantly
perform who you believe yourself to be, as well as projecting the
social identity and conditioning that you have imbibed. And since
your performance of your identity entails a perpetual communi-
cation with your unconscious and the collective unconscious, you
perpetually generate circumstances, relationships, and synchro-
nicities that mirror and affirm and elaborate your identification.
If you want to know who you unconsciously believe you are,
just take a look at your life, your surroundings, your relationship.
Your life mirrors those deep beliefs.
The circumstances and relationships that we create often
just don’t feel “synchronous” or “magical” because they’re rep-
etitions that we’re accustomed to; they feel maybe a bit boring
and confining, a bit expected. Many of us have unconsciously
accepted conditioned identities as “wrong” or “broken” or

part one: e xistential basics 33
“deserving of resentment” or “not deserving to be highly val-
ued”—and so we continue to magically generate results that
reflect and affirm that.
I can’t emphasize enough that this does not mean you are
to “blame” for difficult circumstances and relationships that your
unconscious creates. You, as an individual, are not “to blame” or
culpable for karmic or social conditioning created beyond your
individual, conscious choice.
You are, however, as an individual, the only person capable of
altering your unconscious conditioning and identity, and restoring
it to its divine reality. You are capable; you are not “at fault” or “to
blame.”
A Basic Concept
I’m going to make explicit a concept that I will probably repeat
many times, because it’s key to this work. Please learn it.
The concept is this: You are not who you think you are.
Whoever you happen to think you are, I assure you, you are
not that. I suggest that you remind yourself of this often, because
it makes this work easier.
When you brush your teeth in the morning, think to yourself,
“I’m not at all who I imagine myself to be. I’m something entirely
different and far more vast and strange. Hmmmm. I wonder what
I really am?”
Who you think you are is largely a societally constructed fic-
tion held together by some compulsively repetitive thoughts and
stories, and it bears little or no resemblance to the being that you
actually are. As the wise and pithy magician Mr. Lon Milo Duquette
says: “Magic is indeed all in your head, but your head is a hell of a
lot bigger than you think it is.” In other words, the whole “external”
world is actually “within” consciousness. No one has ever experi-
enced an “objective” world outside of their subjective awareness.

34 e xistential kink
Even the most rigorous scientific experiment can only be experi-
enced subjectively. There’s simply no world outside of our subjec-
tive awareness.
The Spirit
The spirit is the active, projective part of the Self that perceives
perfection, and it broadcasts inspirations based on its perception
of endless possibility and perfection.
Our ego-personality, our conscious mind, often mistrans-
lates these inspirations into a lot of opinions about how things
“should” be, which maintains our sense of alienation.
These opinions tend to have a kind of imperative force to
them, such as:
“People should be kinder.”
“I should get in shape and eat more greens.”
“The world should be fair.”
“We shouldn’t have to use money; everything should be a gift
economy.”
“I should only want to have sex with appropriate people.”
On and on and on and on, forever.
Remember, the spirit sees no limits, only pure simultaneous
infinity and possibility. And when the conscious ego mind picks
up on impressions from the spirit, it struggles to translate those
into this limited material world, so those impressions of infinity
end up sounding like ideas about how things “should be.” And the
spirit-as-translated-by-the-ego, with all its infinity and opinions,
tends to be quite judgmental of the animal self, with all its messy
excretions and sexual desires and messy kitchens and appetites
for cheesecake.
But the weird thing is, behind all this “should” stuff and all
these judgments and opinions, there’s this magnificent power
that the spirit has.

part one: e xistential basics 35
This magnificent power usually goes untapped in a human
life.
You see, the super-power of the spirit is total approval, total
embrace, total celebration, the total perception of the already-
existing perfection of life. When the spirit exclaims “perfect!” the
conscious mind/the ego tends to hear that as “make things more
perfect! They suck now!”—but actually what the spirit is saying is
“everything is perfect right now!”
Yes, everything. The world and our selves in all their fucked-up
glory.
That experience of total approval and total embrace, total
absence of shame or aversion, is what the spirit is always trying
to teach us about and it’s ironically what our conscious mind mis-
translates as all those “shoulds” and judgments.
Okay, so how do we change this state of affairs?
The Sexual Process of Magic
Existential Kink is a potent form of magic (also known as: “psycho-
logical integration”) in which the receptive feminine—the uncon-
scious, the disowned and denied, the soul—becomes pregnant
with the perfection-vision of our spirit—the masculine, projective
part of our being, and eventually gives birth to positive synchro-
nous manifestations in our lives.
This is actually the esoteric meaning of the Immaculate
Conception. The Virgin Mary becomes pregnant with the total
approval spirit energy of God—she lets its energy flow all the
way down through her, to her instinctual animal self and gen-
itals. When she does that, she conceives and later gives birth
to Jesus Christ, who is a symbol of the Anima Mundi, the World
Soul, aka the Self.
Okay, so that’s some far-out metaphysical stuff, what the hell
does that mean, in practical terms?

36 e xistential kink
What that means is you’re going to take all the embracing-
approval-seeking-inherent-perfection-perceiving power of your
spirit, tell your ego “thanks but you can shut the fuck up for a
while,” and send all that embracing-approval-seeking-inherent-
perfection-perceiving down to your actual life, body, emotions,
and present situation.
In the process of Existential Kink you invite your spirit to have
the realization that your life on earth—right now, right here, in
this animal, human body—is actually exactly what it has always
wanted to celebrate with its exultant songs of perfection.
Another way of saying that is that the practice of Existen-
tial Kink is the work of becoming attuned to practical magic; you
decide to fully incarnate, to agree fully to be who you already are,
however messy or stinky that may be—with no reservation, no
hold-back, no “if-only,” no judgment, no shame.
And in dropping your resistance and negative judgment, you
bring yourself fully into resonance with practical reality, which
happens to be the only position from which you can effectively
influence it.
Most of us human beings have spirits-that-are-poorly-
translated-by-egos into lots of judgment and stand-offish-ness—
most have us have conscious minds that have not yet fully com-
mitted to incarnation, and that’s why we’re not unstoppable
forces of nature.
When you fully commit to incarnation here, in this material
plane, fully commit to being who-you-already-are-and-having-
the-experience-you’re-already-having with total orgasmic kinky
joy—there’s a paradox right there.
The paradox is that once you fully commit to being who you
already are, having what you already have, and hugely celebrating
it, you become a masterful practical magician, a force of nature
capable of shifting circumstances very easily.

part one: e xistential basics 37
Your degree of success in becoming lucid in this waking
dream of the earth corresponds precisely to your willingness to
have your ego step aside and allow your spirit to drench your ani-
mal self, your unconscious, and all your actual circumstances, with
its high-powered perception of utter perfection.
When you do this, to speak in sexy terms, your spirit is able
to plant the loving seed of “already totally perfect! Wow!” in the
womb of your unconscious, creative self. Then, magically speak-
ing, what happens is that seed of “already totally perfect! Wow!”
gestates in the womb of your unconscious self, and in a matter of
days or weeks or months, eventually your unconscious self births
the child of that seed into the world . . . in the form of circum-
stances, new awareness, synchronicities, people, events.
In this metaphor, the child of the perception-of-perfection,
the child sired by the approving wisdom of your spirit unmedi-
ated by the delusional ego, is your magical result, your positive
synchronicity.
You see, the unconscious, creative, animal part of us is always
getting impregnated with seeds from the spirit and is always giv-
ing birth to magical results. But usually those seeds from the spirit
have been genetically modified by the ego, which, as we discussed,
takes the “perfection!” impulse of the spirit and perpetually mis-
translates it as “this should be perfect, but it isn’t! This Sucks! Why
isn’t it perfect yet? This is all wrong! This is terrible; I hate this!”
So what usually happens is that the creative, receptive part
of us (the unconscious) gets pregnant with these seeds of refusal,
shaming, judgment, rejection. And then she gives birth to magical
results—to circumstances and experiences and synchronicities
and relationships in our lives—that have this quality of stimulat-
ing feelings of shame and refusal and rejection in us.
To use dualistic language, we might say that before we get
very deliberate about this work, we often create “negative”

38 e xistential kink
synchronicities. In other words, synchronicities or “meaningful
coincidences” are perpetually happening: there’s always a per-
fect, poetic rhyming mirror relationship between who you most
deeply know yourself to be and what you externally experience.
Sadly, it’s just that most people deeply (unconsciously)
believe themselves and the world to be wrong and “not good
enough,” so they experience external synchronicities in their lives
that rhyme with and affirm “wrong” and “not good enough.”
The practice of Existential Kink that I’m about to share with
you is a rapid and effective means of turning around who you
most deeply experience yourself to be, thereby greatly improving
the quality of synchronous experience in your life.

Lesson 2
The Seven Axioms of
Existential Kink
This lesson includes:
• Having is evidence of wanting
• We have a choice as to whether we experience
sensation as pleasure or pain
• It’s possible to get off on every “stroke,” and every
happening in life is a “stroke”
• The degree of being “turned off” or “turned on” is a
factor of approval
• Desire evolves through fulfillment, not denial and
repression
• Shame is the Magic Killer
• The truth is sensational

40 e xistential kink
An axiom is a proposition that’s assumed without proof for the
sake of studying the consequences that follow. In other words,
the seven axioms I’ll present are working propositions that I can’t
“prove” to you are true, but I can say that if you experiment with
accepting them as true and see what consequences result from
that acceptance, you will find those results to be fascinating and
rewarding.
1) Having is evidence of wanting
This axiom can be a bit of a shocking and uncomfortable idea,
especially if you’ve had hardships in your life in the past or pres-
ent. It can be very jarring to consider those as something that you
“wanted.” But, again, it’s not the conscious part of us that “wants”
difficulties or negative patterns. It’s the unconscious part of us.
The daemonic part. The part of us that we don’t usually identify
with, but that nevertheless strongly impacts our experience.
“Having is evidence of wanting” is another way of phrasing
the pithy quote that we previously read from the old wizard Carl
Jung: “Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct
your life and you will call it Fate.” Jung explained throughout his
work that your unconscious is the fertile, receptive, magically effi-
cacious part of you. The unconscious is generative because the
emotions, symbols, and attitudes within it create the synchronic-
ities, or meaningful coincidences, that shape your experience.
Whatever desires are in your unconscious, will be “born,” will
happen, and the results of those desires will seem to be come
toward you from some unfathomable outside agency—in other
words, “fate.”
The good news is, when you do the uncomfortable work of
making these strong, unconscious desire-curiosities conscious, by
giving them a vast, taboo-level of approval, they lose their fateful
power to fuck with you.

part one: e xistential basics 41
So the purpose of the axiom “having is evidence of wanting”
is not at all to blame anyone or to shame them for their experience
(“you’re so horrible! you wanted this!”)—as shame and blame are
highly, highly counterproductive in integration work (as the more
you shame something the more unconscious it will become!)—
but rather the purpose of the axiom is to serve as an excavation
tool, so that you can gently and humorously begin digging for the
unconscious desire-curiosities that shape your experience, and
in that way become massively empowered to own those desires
with a deep sense of sovereignty and agency and to thereby pos-
itively change our experience.
Because most of us human beings have many “negative”
unconscious desires, when most beginning magicians try their
hands at “manifestation,” they may think it “doesn’t work”
because we don’t get what our conscious mind wants, or because
we get something that resembles what we thought we wanted,
but it turns out to kind of suck.
That’s the sort of big bummer that can be very confusing, and
that causes many would-be magicians to just give up and decide
it’s all a bunch of nonsense.
But here’s the kicker: even the most amateur form of magic
or half-assed attempt at fulfilling a goal always works perfectly
to bring us what our being actually, most deeply wants—that is,
what our unconscious wants. And since we’re always doing magic
“accidentally” all the time anyways, it’s an excellent idea to do
magic deliberately, so you can become more aware and in control
of the process of desiring and receiving.
So I invite you to consider the idea that any current situa-
tions in your life, especially those situations that tend to recur
over and over again in an annoying pattern (i.e., you can only
seem to bring in a certain amount of money each month, you can
only seem to attract the same kind of less-than-awesome part-
ner, you feel repeatedly betrayed by friends, etc.), are the result

42 e xistential kink
of your already-always-happening accidental magic, and as such
they represent a beautiful fulfillment of a deep desire in your
unconscious.
Naturally when I mention that “having is evidence of want-
ing,” folks are quick to bring up children stuck in devastated
war zones or abusive situations and say, “How can you say they
wanted that? What kind of horrible monster would dare suggest
such a thing?”
Well, to this I say: first of all, it’s not just our personal uncon-
scious desires that affect the external situations in anyone’s life—
it’s the collective unconscio