



A Game By
Jon Gilmour & Doug Levandowski
Art By
Heather Vaughan, JJ Moore, Monica Magaña, Andy Gruba
Copyeditors
S Gavis-Hughson, Nick Sauer, & Dustin Schwartz
Graphic Design & Layout
Matthias Bonnici

KIDS ON BIKES - DELUXE EDITION
Game Creators: Jon Gilmour & Doug Levandowski
Illustrator: Heather Vaughan, JJ Moore, Monica Magaña, Andy Gruba
Graphic Design & Layout: Matthias Bonnici
Lead Copyeditor: Dustin Schwartz
Copyeditors: S Gavis-Hughson & Nick Sauer
Renegade Game Studios - San Diego, California
Hunters Entertainment - Burbank, California
All text and artwork in this book are
©2018 Hunters Entertainment LLC. All rights reserved
www.renegadegames.com
Facebook: facebook.com/PlayRGS
Twitter: @PlayRenegade
Instagram: @renegade_game_studios
RGS4808
ISBN-13: 978-0-9998548-0-8
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Made in China
www.huntersbooks.com
facebook.com/HuntersEntertainment
@OutbreakUndead

Deluxe Edition

















Table of Contents
SETTING BOUNDARIES
PAGE 3
WORLD BUILDING
PAGE 5
CHARACTER CREATION
PAGE 9
PLAYING THE GAME
PAGE 27
POWERED CHARACTERS
PAGE 41
INFORMATION FOR THE GM
PAGE 47
APPENDIX A - RELATIONSHIP QUESTIONS
PAGE 56
APPENDIX B - STRENGTHS
PAGE 59
APPENDIX C - FLAWS
PAGE 61
APPENDIX D - POSSIBLE ASPECTS FOR POWERED CHARACTERS
PAGE 62
APPENDIX E - TROPES
PAGE 66
APPENDIX F - DIFFICULTY RATINGS AND CONSEQUENCES
PAGE 72
BLANK CHARACTER SHEET
PAGE 75
Deluxe Edition Adventure Modules
PAGE 77

Kids on Bikes
The door to the old house creaks open,
the rust on the hinges groaning as you
see the dust floating like spores in the air
inside. By the faint light of your cheap flash-
lights, you see the stairs to the upper floor,
its railings gnarled and broken like crooked
teeth. Their curve makes the stairs seem
almost like a hungry grin, and you wonder if
their age will support your weight. Still, you
must go in.
The only question is who will go first?
In Kids on Bikes, you’ll take on the roles of
everyday people grappling with strange,
terrifying, and exceptionally powerful forces
that they cannot defeat, control, or even fully
understand. The only way to face them is to
work together, use your strengths, and know
when you just have to run as fast as you can.
NOTE: Most of this book is written with players in mind
and directed toward them. GMs, all of this information
will be pertinent to you, too, and we’ve included
more information for you at the end
of the book, starting on page 47.



- Setting Boundaries -
Before starting to create your characters, you and the gamemaster (GM)
should address the kinds of things that the players want to see in the game
and the things they don’t want to see. You’ll already have agreed on the over-
all tone you want the game to have, but it’s important to know what narrative
elements might upset players so the group can avoid them. Doing so will
make the game more enjoyable for everyone. To start this process, the GM
will ask whether the players would like to discuss these boundaries or simply
give the GM lists.
If players agree to have a discussion, everyone will talk about what they’re
okay with and what they want to avoid. During this discussion, don’t ask
others to explain why they don’t want certain elements in the game; take
their requests at face value and respect them. However, do feel free to ask
for clarification.
If players would rather give the GM lists, they’ll each write down the topics
they’d like to avoid, and the GM will compile that list anonymously. As with
the other method, there shouldn’t be discussion of why players don’t want to
address certain topics.
In addition to the group’s comfort, another factor to consider while estab-
lishing boundaries is where you’re playing the game. If you’re playing in the
privacy of your own home or in a conference room at a convention, you
only need to consider the players’ preferences. However, if you’re in a public
place, if you’re around younger people, or if there are other factors beyond
the preferences of the group, you should consider them when establishing
boundaries. In general, you should be playing the game in a way that will
be comfortable for everyone who may hear it. For example, your group may
be comfortable addressing issues of race in ’50s suburbia — but if you’re in
public, everyone who overhears you might not be. Try to keep this in mind
and be respectful to anyone who might overhear your game.
If, during the game, someone accidentally brings up one of the topics that
should be avoided — or if anything that is part of the story is making you
uncomfortable — simply knock quickly and lightly on the table. Whoever is
currently narrating should simply rewind and proceed down a different path.
There is no need to discuss your request to go in a different direction; the
group will just move on with the story in another direction.
PAGE 3



PAGE 5
- World Building -
Kids on Bikes should probably be set in a small town at any point in history
before everyone had a video camera in their pocket at all times. It should
probably be a place remote enough that the rest of the world just doesn’t
care about it but close enough that black helicopters can be there within
hours. Everyone in the town probably knows everyone else — for better
or for worse. People look out for each other, but rumor also travels fast.
Ultimately, though, this is all up to you.
We recommend letting the players work together to craft the town, possibly in
a short session prior to playing, or even during the same session if the players
are okay with the GM thinking on their feet.
For groups who aren’t comfortable creating their world together or for
groups who want to dive right into the gameplay, the GM can also create a
setting for the group instead, answering the questions below ahead of time
and then sharing the answers with the group to start the game.
Collaborative Creation
If you choose to collaboratively build the world, players should first agree
on the tone they want the game to take — whether that’s serious, goofy, or
somewhere in the middle. This decision will help guide the decisions you’ll
make when creating the town. As with the rest of the game, there are no
wrong answers here! It’s whatever you want the game to be.
Second, all players should discuss the era in which you want the adventure
to take place. Early ’80s? Mid ’60s? Present day? Since the time period will
have such a strong impact on the course of the game, make this decision as
a group, with as much discussion as you need.
If you choose to build the world together, answer the following questions to
create the location, adapting the number of questions asked, as indicated
below, so that each player is answering the same number of questions about
the town.
1. Our adventure takes place in… (name of town and state)
2. The industry our location is best known for is…
3. Our town is famous for…
4. Our town is infamous for...
5. Economically, our town is… (prospering, floundering, stagnant, etc.)
6. A notable local organization is… (Duplicate in a five-player game.)
7. A notable local landmark is… (Duplicate in a three-player game or
five-player game.)
8. Our school’s sports team is called…
After constructing the town, each player shares one rumor about the town.

PAGE 6
Especially in a small town, rumors drive a lot of what goes on. The GM writes
these rumors down, keeping them in mind so that they can influence the
upcoming game — though there may be sources for the rumor that the|
players can’t even imagine. Also, not all rumors have any truth to them.
Finally, keep in mind that as long as you’re within the bounds of what the
group has agreed to include in the game, there are no wrong answers.
For Example: Carlos goes first and says that they’re in a town called
Perkins, Colorado. Yasmin follows and says that the town is best known
for mining. Emily then says that the town is famous for its candles,
which it has made and sold to the world for years. Carlos then says that
the town is infamous for a mining accident that trapped twelve miners
underground a decade ago. Yasmin decides that the town is econom-
ically floundering as people move away from coal energy. Emily says
that a notable local organization is the Elks, an organization that most
of the adult men in the town belong to. Carlos says that one notable
local landmark is the closed mine that no one is allowed to go near.
Yasmin adds that another notable landmark is the diving cliff, a place
where teens often jump into the river that surges during the late spring
thaw. Emily rounds out the answers by saying that the high school’s
sports team is called the Mountain Lions.
As they move into the rumors, Carlos says that he heard that the Elks
is really a front for a devil-worshipping cult. Yasmin says that she heard
that Mr. Worthy, the principal of the high school, is carrying on an affair
with Mrs. Yates, the principal of the middle school. Finally, Emily says
that she heard that when they found the bodies of the trapped miners,
two were missing — and that the ten that were recovered seemed to
have been attacked by some sort of animal.
Gautier, the GM, should abide by the elements that the players created
for the town. But over the course of the game, the GM and the players
can decide together whether any — or all — of those rumors are true.
Our Suggestions
We suggest that the game takes place in a town where children can ride their
bicycles from one side of town to the other relatively quickly, probably in
under an hour — so a town that’s no more than ten miles across. A town
this size also allows non-player characters (NPCs) to spread information and
rumors more quickly — and for NPCs who are important to the characters to
hear about these rumors just as quickly. And, more frighteningly, it prevents the
characters from having a lot of places to hide. It’s also important that there
will be parts of town that are empty, especially at night. In a place like New
York City, nothing could happen without at least a few people seeing it…

A note about historical accuracy: While avoiding anachronisms makes the
experience more realistic, nobody likes that person at the table who says,
“Well, actually, the Millennium Falcon toy in question wasn’t released until
1978!” Just roll with it — unless a person in 1973 whips out a smartphone. In
general, leave it to the GM to correct any necessary anachronisms.
Multiple Sessions
We hope that you’ll enjoy Kids on Bikes enough to play it over multiple
sessions, developing and growing your characters and the world around
them. Assuming that time has elapsed in the world of the game between
sessions, before you start a new session, each player should explain one thing
that has changed in the town between then and now — big or small. Perhaps
it’s a new rumor that’s floating around. Perhaps in the time between the last
adventure and the new one, things have changed about the town, like the mill
that was struggling finally closed, or the school mysteriously burned down.
These new events can help to drive the narrative of the new game — and give
the players some control over where the story goes.
For Example: In the story, the characters go into the mine to see if
there’s any truth to the rumors. They find another body down there,
another one of the miners, but it has been very badly attacked... by
what seem like human teeth. And they swear that they hear something
down there with them, but it is too dark to really see. At the start of their
next game, Emily says that she heard that some of the livestock around
town have started to go missing — victims of strange, midnight attacks.
Yasmin says that one change to the town is that government agents
have come in to investigate the mine further after the group’s discovery.
Carlos says that a new restaurant has opened up, and the food isn’t
very good — but all of the Elks seem to always be there. Again, the
rumors may be true or they may not be. But the changes to the town
(in this case, the arrival of government agents and the opening of a new
restaurant) should be taken as fact.
PAGE 7



- Character Creation -
The core of any RPG is the character you’ll be embodying. You and your GM
should work together to agree upon a character you’ll be excited to play. One
who reminds you of yourself in important ways — but who also is different
enough from you to be an escape from the real world.
If there are boundaries that you want the characters to have or modifications
that you want to make to the creation process, as a player or GM, please do!
The core of the game is the experience that the players will have, and
anything you want to do to augment that experience is great.
Process Overview
When creating your character, you’ll move through the following steps, likely
in this order:
1. Select a trope from the Playbook and take the appropriate
character sheet.
2. Make trope selections for your character: age, strengths, flaws,
first name.
3. Introduce your character to the rest of the group.
4. Answer questions about your character’s relationship with the
other characters in the game.
5. Complete the finishing touches for your character: motivations,
fears, backpacks, last name, trope-specific questions.
Selecting a Trope
To streamline the character creation process, we’ve created a set of tropes
that you can use at the start of game to get into character more quickly. These
tropes, which fall into categories like Loner Weirdo, Stoic Professional, or
Brilliant Mathlete, will determine your character’s stat dice and streamline
some choices for you. Tropes can be found in the Playbook, which is available
at huntersbooks.com/downloads-kidsonbikes. Alternatively, you can find the
information for these tropes in Appendix E on page 66.
Choose the trope that you’re most interested in playing. There’s no right or
wrong answers here, and your GM will work with you to make sure that, what-
ever character you choose, you’ll be central to the story of the game. And re-
member, selecting a trope does not mean that you’ll be forced into a certain
style of play. True, the Brutish Jock isn’t going to be as charming as the Pop-
ular Kid, but, as in life, be careful not to assume too much about a personality
based on only a few descriptors.
If you don’t find a trope that fits your sense of your character, feel free to
work with the GM to create your character from the ground up! This will take
more time, but for players who already have a clear vision of who they want
their character to be — or for players who don’t want their character to fit
into one trope or another — this might be the most satisfying way to create
a character. (For more details on this process, refer to “Creating a Character
from Scratch” on page 24.)
PAGE 9

In the bottom right corner of your trope sheet, you’ll find two questions
specific to your trope and, likely, your age. These will help you flesh out who
you are. You don’t need to answer these out loud, but by the end of the
character creation process, you should know what your answers are.
Character Stats
The trope you choose will determine how you assign dice to your six stats.
The higher the possible value on a die, the better your character is with that
stat. The six stats are:
Brains: This stat determines how book-smart a character is. This will
determine how well they understand problems, how well they did or
are doing in school, and how quickly they’re able to solve academic
problems.
Brawn: This stat determines how much brute strength a character has.
It does not determine how well they can fight — just how well they
can lift things and how much physical damage they can take. It also
determines how physically intimidating a character is.
Fight: This stat determines how good a combatant a character is with
whatever weapons or fighting skills you decide your character knows.
While a character with a high Fight stat won’t be able to pick up a gun
and use it effectively if they have never fired one before, this stat will
make them good with weapons that they do have experience with. Also,
they’ll be able to learn how to use new weapons and fighting skills more
easily, if given proper training.
Flight: This stat determines how fast a character is — as well as how
skilled they are at evading their problems (both literally and figura-
tively). Characters with a high Flight stat will be fast and tough to trap
both physically and verbally.
Charm: This stat determines how socially adept a character is and
how good they are at reading the emotions of another person or
group of people. Characters with a high Charm stat will be able to talk
themselves out of tough situations and into good ones with relative
ease — within reason.
Grit: This stat determines how hard it is to break a character emotion-
ally or physically. Characters with a high Grit stat will be able to keep
a level head in the worst of situations and will be able to keep their
cool even when pushed hard. Finally, this stat also determines how
street-smart a character is.
The higher a stat is, the better a character is at skills involving that stat — and
the more likely they are to succeed when using that stat. While there’s no
guarantee that you’ll roll your maximum, generally, characters will be better
able to pass checks with their higher dice.
PAGE 10

Die Brief Explanation
d20
Superb — Even upon first meeting you, anyone would be able
to readily tell that this is a strength of yours. You are remarkably
good with respect to this stat.
d12
Impressive — People who know you would say that you’re pretty
good with respect to this stat, but it wouldn’t be something
that’s obvious during a first encounter.
d10 
Above Average — You aren’t remarkably good in terms of this
stat, but you’re slightly above average.
d8
Below Average — You aren’t too bad in terms of this stat, but
you’re certainly not good, either. You’re just slightly worse
than average.
d6
Bad — People who know you would say that you’re pretty bad
with respect to this stat, but it wouldn’t be something that’s
obvious during a first encounter.
d4
Terrible — Upon first meeting you, people would immediately
be able to tell that this is a weakness of yours. You are remark-
ably bad with respect to this stat.
When creating your character, think carefully about how your d20 stat and
your d4 stat balance each other out. If your character has a d20 in Charm and
a d4 in Flight, consider what that means for your character. Have they always
talked their way out of their problems instead of having to run from them —
including gym class? Or were they always so slow that they had to use humor
and kindness to compensate for their inability to escape? Think about how
your other stats relate to this balance, too.
Stats will also be used to resolve skill checks and combat, which we’ll address
in “Stat Checks” on page 27 and “Combat Encounters” on page 34.
Character Ages
For some of the tropes, you’ll also need to pick your character’s age: child,
teen, or adult. Groups of characters can certainly be a mixture of all three
ages. The GM and the players will just need to establish early on what draws
their characters together for their first adventure. For future adventures, you’ll
be linked by the events of the first session. The age of the characters has
implications throughout the character creation process and during gameplay.
The rules will discuss these implications as they become important.
At the start of the character creation process, the character’s age determines
what strengths each character gets for free — and what modifiers they have
to roll with their stat dice.
Children automatically receive the Quick Healing strength, and they cannot
take the Rebellious strength. When rolling stat checks (described in the “Stat
PAGE 11

Checks” section, starting on page 27), children add +1 to their Flight and
Charm checks, as they’re fast and likeable.
Teens automatically receive the Rebellious strength. When rolling stat checks,
teens add +1 to their Fight and Brawn checks, as they’re pugnacious and in
their prime.
Adults automatically receive the Skilled at ___ strength. This skill will corre-
spond to their profession — either legal or illegal. When rolling stat checks,
adults add +1 to their Brains and Grit checks. Even if they aren’t always
geniuses, they’ve seen enough of the world to know what it’s about and to
not get shaken by much.
Selecting Strengths and Flaws
Once you’ve selected your trope and age, choose from the strengths and
flaws associated with that character. Strengths are mechanical advantages
that your character will have when playing the game. Flaws are not mechan-
ical, but they’ll help you develop your character’s personality. Choose two
strengths and two flaws from those associated with your character’s trope.
Or, if you want to draw from the larger list when deciding, you may. The full
lists can be found in Appendix B: Strengths (page 59) and Appendix C: Flaws
(page 61).
Once you have done this, give your character a first name — or a nickname
that they go by. Hold off on a last name for now just in case you find out, as
you’re introducing your characters, that they’re related to another character.
Including Characters Who Are Disabled or Neuroatypical
For some players, a traditionally “able-bodied” or “neurotypical” character
might not fit their vision of their character. Instead, a player may want to play
a character who is physically disabled or whose brain functions differently. As
long as the players and the GM agree that you will be appropriately sensitive
in playing the character, you can play any kind of character you want to play.
When embracing these differences, keep in mind all of the likely consequenc-
es, both positive and negative. Fleshing out these traits will help you play
your character better.
For Example: If Helene’s character has been using crutches to get
around for most of her life, she won’t be quite as mobile, but her upper
body might be accordingly stronger. If Raj is deaf, he may have picked
up the ability to read lips. Also, think about what your character needs
to do in response to their difference. If Hana is on the autism spectrum,
she might need time after experiencing sensory overload before she
can focus again, and she might have a process that helps her refocus
more quickly.
Remember that the limitations that accompany these differences should
consistently develop the role-playing experience. Some differences may
present situations that require more complex problem solving — or may lead
PAGE 12

to easier solutions to others. Remember, the GM and player should both
carefully consider whether or not a player is ready to embrace this role-playing
respectfully before agreeing — and you should make sure that everyone at
the table is comfortable with the direction of the character.
Also, remember that things that would make a character disabled or
neuroatypical are almost always on a spectrum, not a binary. To the casual
observer, a character with autism, for example, might be indistinguishable
from other members of the party — or that character may be non-verbal. If
the character is hearing-impaired, they might be able to hear normally with
hearing aids — or they may be completely deaf. It’s up to you where you put
your character along any spectrum.
Two words of caution about these changes, though: First, make sure that
you’re playing them in order to develop the character and the story, not for
jokes or for novelty. Second, the GM should take care to not consistently
exclude characters from events based on any agreed-upon changes.
As stated before, playing a character with limitations provides you with an
opportunity to problem-solve or think about a situation that you may not have
considered. How would Raj problem-solve in a scenario where he couldn’t
see the lips of a person who is trying to communicate with him? How would
Helene problem-solve if the only way of a situation is to run away? As in real
life, differing abilities provide an opportunity for what could be considered
non-traditional problem solving.
There may be a few moments when a character who is confined to a wheel-
chair might not be able to stay with the group. However, since the GM agreed
to a player’s modifications to their character, they should take care not to
make these moments frequent. And the GM should encourage players to feel
good about the choices they made for their characters, especially if they
made those choices to deepen the role-playing in the game.
PAGE 13

For Example: Priya chooses to create a character named Becky, who is
on the autism spectrum. All of the players and the GM agree that they’re
comfortable with Priya’s ability to play this character thoughtfully. Priya
decides that Becky is a Scout who knows quite a lot about the great
outdoors. She can identify all local vegetation by sight, knows which
plants are edible and which are poisonous, knows when they flower, and
can vividly describe all of these plants from memory. One of Becky’s fa-
vorite things is to be outside, away from lots of people and loud noises,
both of which make her very uncomfortable. Sometimes, Becky gets
overwhelmed if too much is going on around her, and as a consequence,
she has learned every inch of the wilderness in and around Perkins.
When Becky gets overstimulated, which often happens if she’s around
too many people or if it gets too noisy, she starts to have trouble fo-
cusing. She needs to go to a quiet place and, if possible, spend time
grounding herself by looking at plants and studying their details for a
few minutes. That’s usually enough to help her feel like herself again.
Race, Ethnicity, Gender, and Sexuality
When creating your character, carefully consider their race, ethnicity, gender,
and sexuality. These parts of your own identity are important to who you are
— and they will be important to who your character is, too.
As a group, you will need to decide to what extent historical accuracy influ-
ences the treatment of different races, non-local ethnicities, and LGBTQIA
people within your game. However, keep in mind that historical accuracy
is not an excuse to be horrible. “But this is how people would have talked
back then” doesn’t go far when you’ve established boundaries. If paranormal
events can happen regularly in the town, then a mining town in the 1950s can
be accepting of all people.
If handled appropriately, race, ethnicity, gender, and sexuality contribute
quite meaningfully to your sense of the character and to narrative elements
in the game. As long as your group agrees on the way these elements will be
addressed and everyone is comfortable with these decisions — and as long
as you are addressing these issues seriously and compassionately — you’ll be
playing within the spirit of the game.
For Example: Dale creates Harper, a gender-queer character who is out
to their closest friends and their family, but not to the town at large. As
with Priya’s character Becky, all of the players and the GM agree that
they’re comfortable with Dale’s ability to portray this character well.
Based on the ground rules that they set — during which they agreed
that there would be no slurs related to, or mistreatment of, LGBTQIA
people — they agree that they aren’t going to make Harper’s gender
identity something that non-player characters really take much note of.
The players and the GM agree that it won’t be something that non-player
characters address unless Harper brings it up.
PAGE 14

Introductions and Questions
Now that you have the basics of your character sketched out, think about
how they’re related to the other characters at the table. We encourage you
to make these decisions based on what the players tell you about their char-
acters. While it probably wouldn’t make much sense for every character in a
five-player game to know every other character at the table well, each char-
acter should have at least one meaningful connection to another character.
This will give your GM ways to bring your characters together in the narrative.
If you’re feeling stuck, some possible relationships include parents and
children; siblings, step-siblings, and half-siblings; cousins; classmates, teach-
ers and students; best friends or worst enemies; neighbors; mentors and
mentees; bosses and employees; and significant others or spouses.
This is a good time to start talking as your character would: “We know each
other from back when we were in high school” rather than “My character
dated their character for a few years.”
For Example: Oswald, Isabella, and Yoon are talking about how
they know each other. Oswald is a teen with the Lone Weirdo trope,
Isabella is a teen with the Wannabe trope, and Yoon is an adult with the
Blue-Collar Worker trope. Isabella says that she and Oswald used to be
close friends, since they’re neighbors, but when she started trying to
be one of the cool kids a few years ago, she stopped hanging out with
Oswald completely and quite suddenly. Oswald adds that since they
started out as friends because they’re neighbors, he wasn’t all that hurt
when they stopped hanging out. He just kind of shifted to hanging out
with other people, and it was fine.
Yoon says that she knows Oswald because he’s friends with her son,
Daniel, who’s also not that popular in school. She says that Oswald often
sleeps over, so she knows him well enough to know what he likes on his
pizza. Oswald adds that he feels comfortable talking to Yoon — more-
so than his parents sometimes, so he often confides in her. Yoon and
Isabella agree that they don’t know each other well. Since it’s a small
town, though, they know each other by sight. Everyone in their small
town knows everyone else in their small town by sight.
Having broadly established how you know and don’t know each other, each
player will answer questions about the other characters. You’ll do this one
at a time, passing the list of questions around the table and collaborating to
make the established relationships more complex and to hint at information
about who you don’t know. This process will make the story of the game
richer, even before the strange events start happening.
Depending on the length of time that you have for character creation, you
could take one of three approaches to answering the questions: quick start,
one sided, or complete.
PAGE 15

Quick Start Questions (2 minutes per player)
In the shortest version of setup, each player will answer one question about
the character clockwise from them at the table. Before answering the ques-
tions, you should move so that you are sitting next to someone you have a
close relationship with.
We do not recommend this setup — though if you’re trying to get a group up
and running for a demo of the game, this can cut down on the time needed
to start playing.
For a character you know:
• Decide whether your relationship with that character is mostly positive or
mostly negative.
• Roll a d20 and answer the corresponding question from the “Character
You Know - Positive” list on page 56 in Appendix A or the “Character You
Know - Negative” list on page 57 in Appendix A. (If the question doesn’t
fit the relationship that you have in mind or if the question you roll has
already been answered, you may answer a question above or below the
one you rolled that hasn’t been answered yet or reroll.)
• Cross out that question.
For a character you don’t know:
• Roll a d20 and answer the corresponding question from the “Character You
Don’t Know” list on page 58 in Appendix A. (If the question doesn’t fit the
concept of that character that you have in mind or if the question you roll
has already been answered, you may answer a question above or below the
one you rolled that hasn’t been answered yet or reroll.)
• Cross out that question.
Once each player has answered a question about the person to their left, this
part of the setup is complete.
For Example: Yoon, Isabella, and Oswald are answering the Quick Start
Questions about each other. Oswald goes first and feels mostly positive
about Yoon and rolls a 15: “What do you and this character have a
mutual, weird love of?” He decides that they both really like fantasy novels.
Yoon was reading The Hobbit when he was over at Daniel’s house a few
years ago, and he borrowed it, read it, and couldn’t get enough fantasy
novels. In Arkansas in the early ’80s, where the game takes place, there
aren’t that many people who read those kinds of books.
Next, Yoon rolls for Isabella, whom she doesn’t know. She rolls a 6: “Why
is this character’s family so important in town?” Yoon tells the group
that Isabella’s mom is the sheriff in town and her dad owns the grocery
store, so both of them are pillars of the community. They’re both good
people, and they’re well respected in town.
PAGE 16

Finally, Isabella feels more negative than positive about Oswald and
rolls a 20: “How did this character betray you the last time you confided
in them?” Isabella and Oswald agree that he’s not the type to betray
people easily, and Oswald pointed out earlier that he’d have to want
something pretty badly to betray her — so Isabella decides that it was
unintentional. A few years ago, Isabella told Oswald about how much
pressure her parents were putting on her, and Oswald talked to Daniel
about it. A few of the cool kids overheard, and they made fun of Isabella
for even talking to Oswald.
One-Sided Questions (5 minutes per player)
In the mid-range version of the setup, each of you will answer a question
about each other character. Seating arrangement is not important for this
version of character questions.
We recommend this approach if you want to jump into the game, especially
if you are running a one-off session of the game.
For a character you know:
• If you feel mostly positive about them, roll a d20 and answer the corre-
sponding question from the “Character You Know - Positive” list on page
56 in Appendix A. (If the question doesn’t fit the relationship that you
have in mind or if the question you roll has already been answered, you
may answer a question above or below the one you rolled that hasn’t
been answered yet or reroll.)
• If you feel mostly negative about them, roll a d20 and answer the
corresponding question from the “Character You Know - Negative” list on
page 57 in Appendix A. (If the question doesn’t fit the relationship that
you have in mind or if the question you roll has already been answered,
you may answer a question above or below the one you rolled that hasn’t
been answered yet or reroll.)
• Cross out that question.
• Now have them answer a question about you from the other list: Negative
if you answered a Positive question about them, or vice versa.
• Cross out that question.
For a character you don’t know:
• Roll a d20 and answer the appropriate question from the “Character You
Don’t Know” list on page 58 in Appendix A. (If the question doesn’t fit the
concept of that character that you have in mind or if the question you roll
has already been answered, you may answer a question above or below
the one you rolled that hasn’t been answered yet or reroll.)
• Cross out that question.
• Now have them answer a question about you from the same list.
• Cross out that question.
Once each player has answered one question about each other character at
the table, this part of the setup is complete.
PAGE 17

For Example: Yoon, Isabella, and Oswald are answering the One-Sided
Questions about each other. Oswald goes first, since he knows both
characters well. He starts with Isabella and a positive question and rolls
a 5: “Why do you care about this character more than they care about
you?” He decides that Isabella really seems to have forgotten about
him, and he misses hanging out with her — but his few overtures to her
have been misinterpreted, he thinks.
Isabella then rolls for a negative question about Oswald (since he rolled
a positive one for her) and gets a 16: “What would losing this character
mean to you?” Isabella says that she and Oswald don’t have much of
a relationship anymore, but that Oswald reminds her of her past. Even
though she wants to be a cool kid, every once in awhile she wants to go
back to not caring about what other people think about her. Hanging
out with Oswald would definitely be that.
Next, Oswald rolls for a positive question about Yoon and gets a 15:
“What do you and this character have a mutual, weird love of?” He de-
cides that they both really, really like fantasy novels. Yoon was reading
The Hobbit when he was over at Daniel’s house a few years ago, and he
borrowed it, read it, and couldn’t get enough fantasy novels. In Arkan-
sas in the early ’80s, where the game takes place, there aren’t that many
people who read those kinds of books.
Yoon then rolls a negative question for Oswald, and gets an 18: “You hurt
this character years ago. Why can’t you apologize?” Yoon decides that,
about a year ago, Yoon and Oswald’s father nearly had an affair. Though
nothing more than a few kisses happened, it caused serious tension
between Oswald’s parents. Yoon doesn’t know if Oswald’s mother
knows or if Yoon just projected the concerns. She’s fairly sure that
Oswald has no idea even though he has said that things have been
weird between his parents. (This would be something that the player
controlling Oswald would know but, in the game, Oswald would not.)
Because he doesn’t know, she can’t apologize to him for what she
assumes is her role in that tension.
Next, Yoon rolls for Isabella, whom she doesn’t know. She gets a 6: “Why
is this character’s family so important in town?” Yoon tells the group
that Isabella’s mom is the sheriff in town and her dad owns the grocery
store, so both of them are pillars of the community. They’re both good
people, and they’re well respected in town.
As a final question, Isabella rolls an 18 for her question about Yoon,
whom she doesn’t know well: “What is this character doing to threaten
their family’s reputation?” Since Yoon is a first-generation immigrant,
her family doesn’t have a reputation in the town, so she rerolls and
PAGE 18

gets a 14: “Who does this character have a very public feud with?”
Isabella asks Yoon what she did before she moved to America, and Yoon
tells her that she was training to be a pharmacist. Isabella decides that,
some years ago, Mr. Talbot the local pharmacist was giving bad advice
to people about what’s dangerous for children. Yoon heard about it
and warned parents. Though she was right, Mr. Talbot said some unkind
things about her, both about her level of training and her race. Mr. Talbot
isn’t a particularly good person, Isabella says — and most people think
he’s wrong on this one.
PAGE 19

Complete Questions (8 minutes per player)
In the long version of the setup, each player will answer two questions about
each character they know at the table and one question about each character
they do not know.
For multi-session plays of Kids on Bikes, this is the approach we recommend.
It takes a while, but it helps you to develop rich, interesting relationships with
each other, and it can lead to good directions for the story to take as you play.
To foster this, while others are establishing their relationships, start thinking
about how you could insert yourself into their dramas. For example, if Hector
thinks Esme stole his bicycle even though she didn’t, perhaps you were the
one who actually did. Or, if Hank cheated on Morris, perhaps you were the
other man... or you know who was.
Remember, this is a big part of the world building of the game. As long as
you’re within the bounds of what everyone wants from the game, there are
no wrong answers here. Create the game you want to play by answering
these questions!
For a character you know:
• Roll a d20 and answer the appropriate question from the “Character You
Know - Positive” list on page 56 in Appendix or the “Character You Know
- Negative” list on page 57 in Appendix A. (If the question doesn’t fit the
relationship you have in mind or if the question you roll has already been
answered, you may answer a question above or below the one you rolled
that hasn’t been answered yet or reroll.)
• Cross out that question.
• Roll a d20 and answer the appropriate question from the “Character You
Know - Negatives” list in Appendix A. (Same caveats as above.)
• Cross out that question.
For a character you don’t know:
• Roll a d20 and answer the corresponding question from the “Character You
Don’t Know” list on page 58 in Appendix A. (If the question doesn’t fit the
concept of that character that you have in mind or if the question you roll
has already been answered, you may answer a question above or below the
one you rolled that hasn’t been answered yet or reroll.)
• Cross out that question.
Once you answer questions about all other characters, pass the sheets to
your left, and that player repeats the process until every player has answered
questions about all other characters.
For Example: Yoon, Isabella, and Oswald are answering the questions
about each other. Oswald goes first, since he knows both characters
well. He starts with Isabella and a positive question and rolls a 5: “Why
do you care about this character more than they care about you?” He
decides that Isabella really seems to have forgotten about him, and he
PAGE 20

misses hanging out with her — but his few overtures to her have been
misinterpreted, he thinks.
Next, he rolls for a negative question about her and gets a 3: “What
could make you betray this character?” He decides that he’s feeling kind
of disconnected from her, so it wouldn’t take much. The last time he
tried to talk to her at school, she was really nasty to him, so if it would
get him something he wanted, he’d betray her — but not in a major way.
Next, he rolls for a positive question about Yoon and gets a 15: “What do
you and this character have a mutual, weird love of?” He decides that
they both really, really like fantasy novels. Yoon was reading The Hobbit
when he was over at Daniel’s house a few years ago, and he borrowed
it, read it, and couldn’t get enough fantasy novels. In Arkansas in the
early ’80s, where the game takes place, there aren’t that many people
who read those kinds of books. Then he rolls a negative question
about her and gets an 11: “What does this character do that makes you
immediately lose your temper?” Oswald decides that doesn’t really
fit their relationship and rerolls, getting a 15: “What insanity has this
character shown warning signs of?” Oswald has seen Yoon be a little bit
too fastidious and worries that she might be tending toward compul-
sive behavior — but he’s a teen and doesn’t necessarily know what all of
the warning signs are.
Next, Yoon rolls for Isabella, whom she doesn’t know. She gets a 6: “Why
is this character’s family so important in town?” Yoon tells the group
that Isabella’s mom is the sheriff in town and her dad owns the grocery
store, so both of them are pillars of the community. They’re both good
people, and they’re well respected in town.
Yoon then rolls a positive question for Oswald, a 10: “What is this
character sacrificing to protect you?” She decides that it isn’t protecting
her, per se, but Oswald is always willing to talk to Yoon about what’s
going on at the high school, something that her son isn’t usually willing
to do. He’s giving up some of his time to let her know what’s going on.
Yoon then rolls a negative question for Oswald, and gets an 18: “You hurt
this character years ago. Why can’t you apologize?” Yoon decides that,
about a year ago, Yoon and Oswald’s father nearly had an affair. Though
nothing more than a few kisses happened, it caused serious tension
between Oswald’s parents. Yoon doesn’t know if Oswald’s mother
knows or if Yoon just projected the concerns. She’s fairly sure that
Oswald has no idea even though he has said that things have been
weird between his parents. (This would be something that the player
controlling Oswald would know but, in the game, Oswald would not.)
Because he doesn’t know, she can’t apologize to him for what she
assumes is her role in that tension.
PAGE 21

Lastly, Isabella rolls a positive question for Oswald, a 16: “What would
losing this character mean to you?” Isabella says that she and Oswald
don’t have much of a relationship anymore, but that Oswald reminds
her of her past. Even though she wants to be a cool kid, every once in a
while she wants to go back to not caring about what other people think
about her. Hanging out with Oswald would definitely be that.
She then rolls a 20 for the negative question about him: “How did this
character betray you the last time you confided in them?” Isabella and
Oswald agree that he’s not the type to betray people easily, and Oswald
pointed out earlier that he hadn’t betrayed her yet — so Isabella decides
that it was unintentional. A few years ago, Isabella told Oswald about
how much pressure her parents were putting on her, and Oswald talked
to Daniel about it. A few of the cool kids overheard, and they made fun
of Isabella for even talking to Oswald.
As a final question, Isabella rolls an 18 for her question about Yoon,
whom she doesn’t know well: “What is this character doing to threaten
their family’s reputation?” Since Yoon is a first-generation immigrant,
her family doesn’t have a reputation in the town, so she rerolls and
gets a 14: “Who does this character have a very public feud with?”
Isabella asks Yoon what she did before she moved to America, and Yoon
tells her that she was training to be a pharmacist. Isabella decides that,
some years ago, Mr. Talbot the local pharmacist was giving bad advice
to people about what’s dangerous for children. Yoon heard about it
and warned parents. Though she was right, Mr. Talbot said some unkind
things about her, both about her level of training and her race. Mr. Talbot
isn’t a particularly good person, Isabella says — and most people think
he’s wrong on this one.
Finishing Touches
Full Name: Now that you’ve fleshed out your character and your relationship
with the other characters, you’ll add the finishing touches. If you were waiting
to complete your name, do that now, keeping in mind that relatives proba-
bly have the same last name — but maybe not. Remember, try to keep your
name in line with the tone that you and the other players have agreed to for
the game.
Motivation: Write down something that strongly motivates you. It might not
be the thing that drives all of your decisions, but it should certainly drive most
of them — and especially the big decisions. It could be a specific motivation
(e.g., “find my son no matter what it costs me” or “impress Tom so that he’ll
go out with me”), it could be more general (e.g., “look cool” or “learn”), or it
could have to do with concealing some information (e.g., “don’t let the others
find out that my business is failing” or “don’t let my children learn that I killed
their father”). If appropriate, share these with other players — but most likely,
you’ll just be sharing this motivation with the GM.
PAGE 22

Typically, children will be motivated by their curiosity. Teens will often be
motivated by social factors like fitting in or finding and maintaining a romantic
relationship. Adults will be motivated by holding onto or protecting what
they have, whether that’s a business or family. And all ages can be motivated
by something or someone that they’ve lost.
Fears: Think about what it is that scares you. There will be some mechanical
implications for this fear that will be addressed in “Planned Actions and Snap
Decisions” on page 29. In terms of role-playing the fears, you will, of course,
want to avoid your fears, and when faced with them, you’ll behave more
irrationally. Ultimately, what you fear in the game is up to you.
Children usually fear things that, rationally, they shouldn’t fear — and don’t
fear things that they ought to. They’re more likely to walk up to a stranger
covered in blood to make sure they’re okay than they are to open up their
closets in the middle of the night. Generally, children fear the unknown and
what they can’t see. Children are also generally not ashamed of their fears;
they’ll gladly declare them to friends and strangers alike.
Teens are all over the place. Some teens are still scared of the things that
scared them as children, but they’ll tend to be very tight-lipped about these
fears. No teen wants to admit that they’re still scared of the dark. Often,
though, teens are more scared of social isolation, losing friends, or embar-
rassing themselves. But sometimes, more mature teens — or ones whose lives
have been rough — will have fears more like an adult’s.
Few adults have the fears that children have — and most of them aren’t
worried about the kinds of social things that concern teens. Rather, they’re
typically afraid of things being taken from them, whether that’s their families,
their homes, or their livelihoods. Some adults also fear realistic things going
wrong — and there’s nothing saying that an adult can’t be afraid of some-
thing that most adults aren’t.
Backpack: The final finishing touch is indicating what you have in your
backpack, literally and figuratively. What items are you never without? For
children or teens, these might literally be in their backpack. For adults, these
might be in the trunk of their car. Ultimately, though, they’re wherever would
make the most sense for you.
Figuratively speaking, the backpack is also a good place to list advantages
that you have over other people. While this doesn’t have to consider all of
the ways in which you are privileged, it would be a good place to think about
the more intangible resources you have at your disposal. For example, Azra’s
backpack might indicate that her parents are exceptionally supportive and
do everything they can to give her the resources to succeed at school.
Adewale’s backpack, on the other hand, might indicate that his bad relation-
ship with his parents has given him a strong sense of self-reliance and ability
to do for himself. The intangible resources in your backpack won’t have a
PAGE 23

mechanical impact on the game, but they should give you places to turn if
you need help in getting out of a problem — or create tension if that resource
is suddenly not available.
Trope-Specific Questions: Each trope sheet in the Playbook has two questions
about your character that should be answered at some point during the
character creation process. So, if you haven’t yet answered them, make sure
to do so now!
The answers to these questions do not need to be shared with the other
players at the table — but they can be if you would like to. Certainly, though,
your responses should be shared with the GM.
Now, you’re ready to start your adventure in Kids on Bikes!
Creating a Character from Scratch
Some players may wish to create their character entirely from scratch
rather than beginning with a trope. Doing so takes longer, but it allows for
truly unique characters that don’t fit into any specific mold. If this is a route
you’re interested in, we encourage you to take it!
Using the blank character sheet in the Playbook (huntersbooks.com/down-
loads-kidsonbikes) or on page 75 of this rulebook, begin by assigning the
dice that you’ll use for your stats. The best way to do this is to assign your
d20 stat and d4 stat, then think about how those stats complement each
other. Then, assign the other dice to the other stats.
Next, select your age: child, teen, or adult. Remember to give yourself the
appropriate bonuses based on your age. Children get +1 to Charm and Flight
and get Quick Healing for free. Teens get +1 to Brawn and Fight and get
Rebellious for free. Adults get +1 to Brains and Grit and Skilled at ___ for free.
Then, select your other two strengths. Referring to the list in Appendix B on
page 59, select two that fit with your vision for your character. Then, select
your flaws. You may select any two from the list in Appendix C on page 61.
Finally, give your character a first name. From this point on, character creation
continues as normal. Refer to the section titled “Introductions and Questions”
on page 15.
Changes to Your Character Across Multiple Sessions
While it’s unlikely that characters will change much over the course of a single
game, in the case of longer campaigns, there might be changes to a character
based on what happens during play. A character who nearly drowns might
develop a fear of water — just as a character who manages to overcome their
fear of water in a critical moment might find that they aren’t as afraid of it
PAGE 24

PAGE 25
anymore. At the end of each session, the GM and players should discuss the
ways in which the characters grew — or regressed — over the course of the
game. Each time you play, you should learn more about your character. They
should never be static. These changes will likely come in the form of new
skills, new fears or flaws, or changed answers to the trope-specific questions.
Except in extreme cases, losses should be counterbalanced by gains. A char-
acter who conquered their fear of dogs at a critical moment might become
boastful, which could cause tension with friends who previously appreciated
their humility. The players and the GM should decide collaboratively what
gains and losses occur at the end of one game or before the next one. Again,
though, except in the strangest cases, there should always be a balance of
what is lost and what is gained.
For Example: In the first game, Yoon, Isabella, and Oswald work together
to go looking for Yoon’s son, Daniel, who disappeared before the game
began. They were able to find him, but he’s currently in a coma, and
doctors aren’t sure if he’ll recover. As a result of seeing the measures
that Oswald and even Isabella went to in order to save her son, Yoon has
gained the “Protective” strength when it comes to those two; however,
because she found her son covered in some kind of strange webbing,
she has added “Spiders” as a fear. Oswald and the GM agree that not
much has changed for him. Isabella and the GM agree that she’s feeling
closer to Oswald again and remembers why she valued him as a friend
when they were younger — but there aren’t any mechanical changes for
her, either.



- Playing the Game -
The game will take the form of a story that you, the other players, and the GM
tell together. The GM will help guide the action of the story and will make the
“big picture” stuff happen, but you’ll have a lot of control over what you do
and how you face the situations the GM throws in your way.
You’ll even have control over which parts you skip over. If your characters
are going to have a pretty run-of-the-mill day at school, you don’t need to
tell the story of all nine periods. Think of the game as the important scenes
that will carry the narrative forward. Focus on the parts that promote action,
excitement, and intrigue.
Stat Checks
While you’re playing, any time you do something that runs the risk of failure,
the GM will set a numerical difficulty for the action. You will then roll the
appropriate stat die and check the value of that die against the difficulty. If
you roll the maximum value of the die and that isn’t enough to succeed at
the check, your die will “explode” — meaning that you reroll the die and add
the maximum value that you rolled the first time to the new roll. Your die may
explode multiple times on a check — but once you succeed at that check,
your die no longer explodes for that check.
Keep in mind that the most you can roll (without the luck of exploding a die)
is 20, and that number is extraordinarily unlikely. However, that doesn’t mean
that the difficulty can’t be higher than 20 in cases where a feat seems truly
impossible for mere mortals.
Choosing a Stat for the Check
As in life, there are always multiple ways to solve a problem. If a character is
being confronted by bullies, it may seem like they have to start swinging and
hope it goes well (Fight) or turn heel and run and hope they’re faster than
the bullies (Flight). But depending on who the character is, they might use
other stats instead.
A character with high Charm might convince the bullies that he’ll show them
a secret entrance into the movie theater if they don’t beat him up. A character
with high Grit might tell them that she has taken worse beatings before
breakfast and make it not seem worth their time. A character with high
Brains might talk the bullies in circles until they let her go because they’re too
confused to throw a punch. A character with high Brawn might physically
intimidate their aggressors to get them to back down. There are always
multiple ways you can solve your problems.
When you’re not sure what kind of check something will call for, you can
always just describe what you’re doing and the GM will tell you what check to
make. For things like deceit and lying, it’s probably going to be Charm.
PAGE 27

Difficulty Explanation & Example
20
A task at which only the most incredible could even possibly succeed
— but if they succeed, it will be one of the most impressive things a
character has ever done. This is a nearly guaranteed failure.
Examples: Lifting a car off of someone trapped under it; solving a
nearly impossible math problem just by glancing at it.
17-19
A task for which success would be incredible and impressive. This,
too, is a nearly guaranteed failure.
Examples: Talking a police officer out of arresting you when you
have clearly broken the law and have no relationship with the
officer; breaking a school record in track.
13-16
A task where success is extraordinary — but decidedly possible for
characters who are truly skilled at it.
Examples: A lucky character finding the right item on the first try;
someone trained in espionage withstanding police interrogation.
10-12
A task where success is impressive — but completely expected for
characters skilled at it.
Examples: A strong person prying open a heavy, locked door; a
computer whiz repairing a computer quickly under pressure.
7-9
A task where success is certain for characters who are very skilled at
it — but not for those who aren’t.
Examples: Convincing the principal that it wasn’t you and your
friends who started the cafeteria food fight; running a message
from one end of a building to the other in a very short time.
3-6
A task where success is likely for all characters except those who
aren’t skilled or who have a low stat in that field.
Examples: A lucky person drawing a non-face card from a deck; a
character silently withstanding a verbal berating.
1-2
A task where success is guaranteed, except in extreme cases.
Examples: A character lifting a 10-pound weight over their head; a
character reciting a multiplication table.
PAGE 28

But if you’re throwing around a lot of science-y words to convince the sheriff
that the mine shaft where you’re actually hiding the half-goat, half-child
creature is structurally unsound so he should stay away, that might be Brains.
Or if you’re threatening your way into a secure area past a young, scared
guard, that might be Brawn — or Fight if you’re describing what you’ll do to
him if he doesn’t step aside. The bottom line is that the stats are here to help
guide your storytelling and help you have fun. If you aren’t sure what to do,
ask the table — and if they aren’t sure, go with your gut.
For Example: Ana has been cornered while she was snooping around
an abandoned warehouse that she and her friends noticed a lot of the
town’s adults going to. The three deranged members of a cult who
cornered her seem intent on sacrificing her to the elder god they
worship, and they’re all brandishing really big knives. Ana is a child
with the Bully trope, so Fight is her best stat. However, the GM tells her
that to fight her way out of this situation would be a very tough Fight
check, a difficulty of 14. It’s not impossible, but Ana doesn’t feel good
about her odds there. Since the cult members are completely deranged,
intimidating them with Brawn (Ana’s d12 stat) is a difficulty of 22.
Similarly, charming them would also be a 22, and since Charm is Ana’s d4
stat, that’s unlikely to work. The cult members, though, are on the older
side and thus a bit slower than children. The GM tells Ana that a Flight
check would be a difficulty of 7. Ana decides that her chances are best if
she goes with that — especially since she gets +1 to her Flight checks
as a child and she has a few Adversity Tokens to spend if need be.
Planned Actions and Snap Decisions
Although the GM always sets a numerical difficulty, there are two distinct
kinds of stat checks: Planned Actions and Snap Decisions. Planned Actions
are stat checks when you have time to think about the best course of action
and, perhaps, work with your friends. If the characters are sitting at a kitchen
table trying to break a coded message that someone left for them and have
all night to do it, that’s definitely a Planned Action. If your character needs to
climb up a wall to sneak into an abandoned factory and has the cover of night
and no one in pursuit, that’s a Planned Action. In short, Planned Actions are
when the conditions are relatively optimal to achieve something.
Snap Decisions, on the other hand, are choices that have to be made quickly
under bad conditions — and are thus more chaotic and unpredictable. If your
character is being chased through a cave, stat checks they make while fleeing
in panic will definitely be Snap Decisions. If your character is under any kind
of great pressure, that would likely be a Snap Decision, too.
Ultimately, it’s the GM’s call whether something is a Planned Action or a Snap
Decision. Players, though, should feel free to try to convince the GM of how
they can get a moment of calm to make a Planned Action in a setting that
would seem to call for a Snap Decision.
PAGE 29

In order to make a check for a Planned Action, do the following steps:
• Once you decide to resolve a problem with a particular stat, the GM sets
a numerical difficulty. For example, if you are trying to crack a safe in the
privacy of your own home with the right tools, you might try to muscle
your way in (Brawn), crack the safe (Brains), or sweet talk a buddy of
yours to apply their safe-cracking skills (Charm).
• Either roll the appropriate die or, because you have time to think and
react calmly, take half the value of that stat’s die. For example, if you have
a d20 in Flight, you may choose to take a score of 10 for Planned Actions
involving Flight instead of risking a roll.
• If the value of the first die rolled is the maximum value of the die, but still
below the difficulty level, the roll “explodes.” Roll the same die again, adding
both values together. This may be repeated as many times as you roll the
maximum, though you must stop as soon as you succeed at the check.
• After determining whether the roll explodes, add any age bonuses to the
roll. Age bonuses cannot cause a roll to explode.
• Children: +1 Charm, +1 Flight
• Teens: +1 Brawn, +1 Fight
• Adults: +1 Grit, +1 Brains
• You may also spend Adversity Tokens (earned from failed checks), with
each token adding +1 to the roll. As with age bonuses, Adversity Tokens
cannot cause a roll to explode.
• Other players may also spend Adversity Tokens to help you, with each
token adding +1 to the roll, though they must also narrate how their
actions are also helping your cause. This is at the GM’s discretion.
• If the total roll is greater than or equal to the difficulty level, you have
succeeded. You and the GM will narrate the success collaboratively.
• If not, you have failed. The GM will direct the narration with minimal
input from you (the greater the failure, the less input from you). The more
you miss by, the worse the failure. You also receive one Adversity Token,
which can be used on future rolls.

When things are dicier and you’re under more duress and stress, you’ll have
to make a Snap Decision. In most ways, the process works as with Planned
Actions but with the following changes:
• First, you cannot take half of the value of the appropriate die. You must roll
to see if you succeed since this is a rushed attempt that you cannot plan.
• Second, although you may spend Adversity Tokens to help yourself, other
players cannot spend Adversity Tokens to help you. There’s no time for
the kind of planning that collaboration requires.
• Third, the GM should make the consequences for failing a Snap Decision
less weighty than failing a Planned Action, though you may still gain an
Adversity Token. Narratively, when everything’s on the line, the tension
is already there, and you aren’t doing something stupid — you’re just in
a bad spot. (On the other hand, when you have time to plan and still fail,
that usually means you’ve decided to take a risk.)
For Example: Two characters have been captured by government forces
and are being aggressively interrogated in different cells to try to
get information out of them. Certainly, this is a Snap Decision — the
characters are under pressure, and the interrogators aren’t going to wait
patiently while the characters plan their responses. The GM might
decide that in order to withstand this level of interrogation, each
character will need a score of 12.
Rebecca, one of the characters, has a Grit stat of d20. She has seen
some rough things in her life, and nothing scares her. She rolls a 13,
succeeding. The GM and the player controlling Rebecca narrate
her success at holding up under questioning. She just barely held
up, though, so there won’t be any benefits beyond the fact that she
did succeed.
The other character, Tricia, has a Grit stat of d6. She rolls a 3, failing by
9 points — fairly badly, but not a complete disaster. Perhaps Tricia gives

up more information than the interrogator even knew she had. Perhaps
she breaks quickly, giving them time to act on that information and
prevent other characters from being able to do what they need to do,
forcing them to scramble to come up with another way to get done
what they need to get done. Perhaps she gives them more information
than she should have, revealing the identity of her accomplices.
Ultimately, this will be up to the GM with minimal input from the player.
Failing a Roll
Remember, in Kids on Bikes, failing a roll isn’t all bad. First and foremost, it
gives you an Adversity Token, which you can use to succeed when you really
need it — especially if you pool it with other Adversity Tokens — or to activate
your character’s strengths. Adversity Tokens give you more options later on,
so failing a few times at the beginning is actually a good thing.
Second, failure can and should push the narrative forward. A failed roll means
that what the character wants to happen doesn’t happen — but that doesn’t
mean that what happens is bad for the story. For example, if the characters
try to hack a computer but aren’t able to, it might mean that they have to
seek out an NPC to help them with it. That character might, in turn, inadver-
tently give them a clue that helps them puzzle out a mystery. Or, if a character
tries to escape on foot from government forces pursuing her, she might be
brought to a facility that holds the secret to the next part of the game.
So, while failures won’t be what your character wants, they should almost
always feel good for the story — and should give the group more directions
to take the narrative you’re building together.
For Example: Tricia rolls a 3 when trying to hold up against the interro-
gation, but she needed a 12. The result is bad — but not a disaster. As
the agent starts applying verbal pressure to her, she cracks and tells
the agent everything: where her friends are hiding and enough details
about the strange animal she and her friends found in the forest to let
the agent know that they’re indeed the children that the government
agents are looking for. That agent quickly tells his supervisor, but in his
rush to tell the others what’s happening, Tricia manages to not tell him
that the animal seems to be able to teleport short distances. Thus, when
the agents arrive at the house of Tricia’s friend, the strange animal is
able to get to safety.
When deciding on the consequences of a stat check, the GM should consult
the following guide:
PAGE 32

Roll - Target
(with applicable modifiers) 
Guidelines for Failure or Success
+10 or higher
The character succeeds smoothly and easily. Likely, it
looks like the character is just showing off, or that the task
is done so readily that it happens without any effort at all.
At the GM’s discretion (and certainly not necessarily), there
could be some unexpected positive results from a success
of this degree.
+5 to +9
The character succeeds quite impressively. At the GM’s
discretion, the character might have some additional
benefits beyond the success, but these will be slight — and
only if important for pushing the game forward.
+1 to +4 
The character succeeds, but not impressively. Any benefits
the character gains above and beyond the success should
be quite limited — if present at all.
0 
The character succeeds, but just barely. Decidedly,
nothing surprising happens — and the player and the GM
should make this success as skin-of-the-teeth as possible.
-1 to -4
The character fails, but not too badly. There might be
some very, very minor short-term consequences, but these
won’t shift the story for more than a minute or two. The
character has tried and almost succeeded.
-5 to -9
The failure is bad, but not a disaster. There will be some
short-term consequences that might lead to some
immediate difficulties — but nothing that the character
can’t handle if they focus on them. The character has tried
to do or has been forced to do something beyond their
capabilities. And, not surprisingly, they’ve failed.
-10 to -14
The failure is profound. There will be consequences for
this failure, likely in keeping with what would be expected,
but that doesn’t mean that those consequences won’t be
very bad. These consequences may strongly influence the
course of the current play session. Generally, though, a
character will only find themself failing this badly when
they bite off more than they can probably chew — or
because of the cruelty of the GM.
-15 or lower
The failure is staggering and catastrophic. There will be
both immediate and long-term consequences for this
failure, above and beyond what might be expected. These
consequences might lead to serious changes in the course
of the long-term arc of the story — especially because
the character should only find themselves failing this
badly through total recklessness or because the GM has
purposefully put them in a staggeringly difficult situation.
PAGE 33

Exploding Rolls and Narrative
When you roll the highest value of the die and thus roll again (when the roll
“explodes”), the narrative should reflect that you have done something
beyond what you could accomplish on your own. As the GM works with a player
to narrate an “exploding” roll, the outcome should be influnced, in part, by
external forces.
For Example: Take Tricia from the previous example, the character being
interrogated. She has a Grit stat of d6 and needs a 12. Since her maximum
possible Grit roll is a 6, she will need external forces to intercede for her to
succeed. Instead of the 3 she rolled in the previous example, she rolled
a 6 on her first roll. She rolls again, getting a 5, and adds that roll to the
first result, making her total 11. She only fails by 1, meaning that there are
very, very minor short-term consequences. Tricia holds out long enough
to give her friends time to do what they need to do — but the govern-
ment agents show up just as they’re finishing. Tricia’s friends then have
to flee quickly, making checks to ensure that they escape. Narratively,
you could say that Tricia holds up as well as she possibly could, and there
is something else that happens to prevent her from failing badly. Just as
Tricia reaches her limit and is about to tell the agent what he wants to
know, that agent gets called out of the room by a supervisor, buying Tri-
cia some time to collect herself.
Or perhaps it’s Penelope who is trying to run away from a group of
government agents who are pursuing her on foot. She has a Flight stat of
d8, and the GM sets the difficulty at 12: impressive, but certainly possible
for someone skilled. She rolls an 8 on her first roll, then 6 on her next roll
for a total of 14 — a success! Perhaps, as she’s running from the agents, a
gate comes down, separating them. Perhaps as she’s running she knocks
over and spills a container of motor oil, on which the pursuing agents
then slip and fall, allowing her to escape. Whatever the outcome, it’s not
that Penelope simply outruns them.
Combat Encounters
Combat in this game functions in the same way as other stat checks, though
sometimes you will be rolling against another character to determine success
or failure.
As with the other checks in the game, combat can be resolved in multiple
ways. Suppose you are about to be physically attacked. You could stand firm
and take the hit (Brawn check). You could attack first and hope to be a better
fighter (Fight check). You could try to talk the attacker out of it before the
punches start flying (very difficult Charm check). You could try to intimidate
the attacker from carrying out the assault (Brawn check or very difficult Grit
check). You could run (Flight check) or stand your ground and dodge the
punches (difficult Flight check).
For combat between two player characters, the GM must confirm that both
players are comfortable with their characters combating each other. Because
of the possible consequences of in-game physical violence, if both players do
not agree to it, the story will need to take a different direction.
PAGE 34

Physical Damage: Physical attacks are more direct combat, either a fistfight or,
if things have gotten really bad, knives and bats.
Roll the attacker’s Fight against the defender’s Brawn (if they’re planning to
stay and fight back) or Flight (if they’re planning to dodge or flee). Presumably,
in a physical fight, both characters will be attacking each other, and assuming
that’s the case, roll separate attack and defense for each character.
At the GM’s discretion, weapons like knives, baseball bats, and so forth might
lead to successful hand-to-hand hit being treated like a projectile hit — or
a slingshot or thrown object might be treated like a hand-to-hand hit. Still,
whether the hit occurs or not should be calculated the same way.
Remember, there are no safe fights in this game. Any time physical conflict
occurs, a character might die. Once players decide to attack each other, a
misplaced blow could hit a temple or a throat. There are no “pulled punches”
or “called shots.” Every fight could be fatal. That said, of course the GM should
allow a playful (or even somewhat aggressive) shove or a nuggie — or even
somewhat hostile wrestling — without risk of anything serious.
Projectile Damage: Most of the time in the game, projectiles will take the form
of guns, which are terribly dangerous for all characters. But, children some-
times throw rocks or have bows and arrows, which could land just right and
be bad — but most likely won’t be all that bad. Keep in mind, though, that all
projectile weapons are potentially lethal.
When projectile combat occurs, roll the attacker’s Fight against the defender’s
appropriate stat (likely Flight or Brawn, depending on whether the character
is diving out of the way or taking the shot). If both characters are shooting or
throwing at each other, roll separate attack and defense for each character.
Remember, high differences between attack and defense with projectiles are
much more dangerous than the same difference for physical combat.
Injuries & Death
During the course of the game, one or more of the characters will likely be
injured. In this game, there are no hit points — but none of you are immortal.
Far from it. Compared to the forces you will probably come into contact with,
you’re exceptionally fragile. A well-aimed bullet from a government agent, the
quick flick of a monster’s jaws, or a telekinetic character could end things in a
moment.
In this game, violence should never be without consequence. Rather than
trading blow after blow, stat rolls and applicable skill rolls should determine
the outcome of a fight before it starts. Players and the GM should then narrate
the outcome. The difference between the rolls (and applicable modifications)
should determine the amount of damage that a player sustains (refer to chart
below) and who gains narrative control over the encounter.
PAGE 35

Result of Rolls
(with applicable modifiers) 
Narrative Result
defender’s roll
is greater than
or equal to
attacker’s roll
Narrative Control: The defender narrates the outcome.
Effect: The defender is uninjured; the projectiles miss
or the blows don’t land or hurt them enough to matter.
attacker’s roll
is greater by
1 to 3
Narrative Control: The attacker explains how they
attack, and the defender narrates what they do to
mitigate the harm to them.
Effect: The defender is hurt, but only temporarily; the
bullet grazes them, but they’re okay; the punch stuns
them, but they can shake it off.
attacker’s roll
is greater by
4 to 6
Narrative Control: The attacker explains their attack,
and the defender explains how they respond. The
attacker then explains how this barely mitigates the
harm.
Effect: The defender is fairly hurt; the bullet hits them
and they need medical attention soon to prevent it
from causing permanent damage; they’re dazed and
likely concussed, but they can keep going; their ribs are
going to hurt for a few days and breathing might sting
for a few hours.
attacker’s roll
is greater by
7 to 9
Narrative Control: The attacker explains their at-
tack, and the defender explains how they respond.
The attacker can alter any of these details as the
defender explains them. Then, the attacker explains
how this response fails to prevent harm.
Effect: The defender is badly hurt; the bullet hits them
dead on, and they’re losing a lot of blood and need
professional care immediately or they’ll die; they’re
unconscious and will be badly concussed when they
wake up; the bone is broken.
attacker’s roll
is greater by
10 or more
Narrative Control: The attacker has full control over
the narrative. They explain what the defender does
in response to the attack — and how ineffective this
response is.
Effect: The defender is dead or quite nearly dead;
the bullet hits them between the eyes and nothing
can save them; they’re beaten so badly that only
immediate medical attention can help — but there will
be permanent effects.
PAGE 36

For Example: Elena and Jordan get into a physical fight over the car
keys, since Elena thinks that they need to drive away and Jordan thinks
that they need to stay and wait for their friends to get back. Both players
agree that they’re comfortable with physical combat and that Jordan is
going to attack Elena to try to take the keys from her. Jordan rolls their
Fight (d12) and gets a 7. In response, Elena rolls her Brawn (d8) to see
how bad the damage is to her. She rolls a 6, a difference of 1. Elena will
be injured, but not badly. Since the fighting is mutual, Elena rolls her
Fight (d10) and gets a 3. Jordan rolls their Brawn (d20), since they’re
taking the hit, and gets a 9. Jordan won’t be injured, since their roll is
greater than Elena’s attack roll.
At this point, they narrate what happens. Jordan describes that they
try to sucker-punch Elena, but Elena says that she notices at the last
second and moves her head to avoid taking too much of a hit. She then
says that she swings back, but because Elena was startled, Jordan, the
better fighter, is able to easily deflect the blow and land a few shots to
Elena’s ribs, causing her to drop the key. While Elena is stunned, Jordan
takes the key a