



Advance praise for Reinventing Organizations
“Ground-breaker! Game-changer! Brilliant! The most exciting book I've
read in years on organization design and leadership models. Sustain-
ability? Employee engagement? Innovation? This elegant, parsimo-
nious way of working realizes those aspirations effortlessly while
exceeding traditional bottom-line measures and infusing heart and
spirit into work without gimmicks. Like a Zen practice, learning to do
less takes discipline, and this book shows how letting go gives back—
to you, your organization, your stakeholders, and the world.”
—Jenny Wade, Ph.D., Author of Changes of Mind
“People have long asked me what a “5
th 
order,” or “high stage” organiza-
tion would look like in the flesh. Frederic Laloux’s richly researched
book is the closest anyone has come, as yet, to answering this
question. This is a stimulating and inspiring read!”
— Robert Kegan, Harvard University’s Meehan Professor of
Adult Learning, and author of In Over Our Heads
“A book like Reinventing Organizations only comes along once in a
decade. Sweeping and brilliant in scope, it is the Good To Great for a
more enlightened age. What it reveals about the organizational model
of the future is exhilarating and deeply hopeful.”
—Norman Wolfe, Author of The Living Organization
“A comprehensive, highly practical account of the emergent world
view in business. Everything you need to know about building a new
paradigm organization!”
—Richard Barrett,
Chairman and Founder of the Barrett Values Centre

“Frederic Laloux has done business people and professionals every-
where a signal service. He has discovered a better future for organi-
zations by describing, in useful detail, the unusual best practices of
today.”
—Bill Torbert, Author of Action Inquiry
“Frederic Laloux’s ‘Teal Organization’ is as close a model to what I
call a ‘conscious organization’ as I have seen—an organization and a
culture that not only thrives in the unfolding paradigm of collective
thought but helps in the unfolding. It could serve as the mid-wife for
a new worldview that will allow humankind to consciously evolve to
a level where the world works for everyone.”
—John Renesch, futurist, founder of FutureShapers, LLC and
author of 14 books, including The Great Growing Up
“As the rate of change escalates exponentially, the old ways of organ-
izing and educating, which were designed for efficiency and repeti-
tion, are dying. Frederic Laloux is one of the few management leaders
exploring what comes next. It's deeply different.”
—Bill Drayton, Founder, Ashoka: Innovators for the Public

REINVENTING
ORGANIZATIONS
A Guide to Creating Organizations
Inspired by the Next Stage
of Human Consciousness
!
!
!
!
!
!
Frederic Laloux
!
!

!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
Copyright © 2014 by Frederic Laloux.
First edition.
All rights reserved. No parts of this book may be used, reproduced, stored in or
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any forms, or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise) without written
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical reviews and certain other noncommercial uses permitted by copyright
law.
Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or
encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials. Your support of the
author’s rights is appreciated.
Published by NELSON PARKER.
Nelson Parker is a trademark of Unfolding sprl.
54 Serbia Street, Brussels 1190, Belgium
Quantity sales: Special discounts are available on quantity purchases of the
electronic format of this book. For details, contact the publisher.
This book is published in a variety of book formats. Some material included with
standard print versions of this book may not be included in the electronic
format.
Printed on acid-free paper, partially sourced from recycled waste material.

TABLE!OF!CONTENTS!
Foreword ix
Introduction: the emergence of a new organizational model 1!
Part!1!1!Historical!and!Developmental!Perspective! 11!
1.1 - Changing paradigms: past and present organizational models 13!
1.2 - About stages of development 37!
1.3 - Evolutionary-Teal 43!
Part!2!1!The!Structures,!Practices,!and!Cultures!!
of!Teal!Organizations! 53!
2.1 - Three breakthroughs and a metaphor 55
2.2 - Self-management (structures) 61
2.3 - Self-management (processes) 99
2.4 - Striving for wholeness (general practices) 143
2.5 - Striving for wholeness (HR processes) 173
2.6 - Listening to evolutionary purpose 193
2.7 - Common cultural traits 225
Part!3!1!The!Emergence!of!Teal!Organizations! 235!
3.1 - Necessary conditions 237!
3.2 - Starting up a Teal Organization 259!
3.3 - Transforming an existing organization 267!
3.4 - Results 285!
3.5 - Teal Organizations and Teal Society 293
Appendices! 307!
1 - Research questions 309!
2 - Beyond Evolutionary-Teal 315!
3 - Structures of Teal Organizations 319!
4 - Overview of Teal structures, practices, and processes 327!
Notes 333!
Selected readings 347!
Index 351
Gratitudes 359

INDEX!OF!KEY!STRUCTURES!AND!PRACTICES!
Structure!
Organizational structure 65, 67, 69, 319
Staff functions 71
Project teams / Task forces 83, 89
Board / Ownership 251, 300
Human!resources!
Recruitment 160, 174, 219
Onboarding 176
Training and coaching 178
Team building 147, 154, 159
Working hours 181
Job titles / Job descriptions 90, 180
Objectives / Target setting 212
Feedback / Performance management 123, 125, 183
Compensation 129
Promotion / Job rotation 114, 180
Dismissal 126, 187
Daily!life!
Office spaces 86, 146, 167
Meetings 162
Decision-making 99, 103
Conflict resolution 112, 165
Information flow 110, 216
Culture / Values 147, 151, 225
Community building / Reflective spaces 154, 159
Major!organizational!processes!
Purpose / Strategy 195, 199, 202, 207
Innovation / Product development 208
Sales / Marketing 208, 212
Purchasing / Investments 106
Budgeting / Controlling 80, 209
Financing / Funding 251
Environmental and social management 169
Change management 103, 214

Foreword ix
FOREWORD!
This is a very important book, deeply significant in many ways, as
much for the pioneering research, insights, guidelines, and suggestions
that it makes as for the many equally important questions and issues
that it raises. It is, without doubt, on the leading-edge of a type of work
we are seeing more and more of at this time: namely, that concerned
with the extremely profound changes in consciousness, culture, and
social systems that we are seeing emerge, in increasing numbers, at this
point in human (and, indeed, cosmic) evolution. Frederic Laloux’s work
focuses specifically on the values, practices, and structures of organi-
zations—large and small—that seem to be driven by this extraordinary
transformation in consciousness occurring around the world. He offers a
very detailed and practical account—what amounts to a handbook,
really—for people who feel that the current management paradigm is
deeply limiting and yearn to bring more consciousness to the way we
run organizations but wonder if it is possible and how to do it.
The book is highly practical, but don’t be mistaken: it is solidly
grounded in evolutionary and developmental theory. Books describing
the broader transformation of consciousness, not just in organizations
but in society, have appeared for at least three decades now, going back
to such pioneering works as The Aquarian Conspiracy, The Turning Point,
The Greening of America, and so on. But there is a major, indeed profound,
difference: development studies continue to indicate, with increasing
certainty, that what has generally been thought of as a single major
transformation in consciousness and culture in the last four or five
decades actually contains two major transformations, emerging
successively, and known variously as pluralistic and integral,
individualistic and autonomous, relativistic and systemic, HumanBond
and Flexflow, green and teal, and order 4.5 and order 5.0, among many
others. And, as developmentalists are increasingly discovering, these
two transformations are simply the latest two in a long line of
consciousness transformations that, slightly modifying the terms of Jean
Gebser, for example, are called Archaic, Magic (Tribal), Mythic

x Reinventing Organizations
(Traditional), Rational (Modern), Pluralistic (Postmodern), and Integral
(Post-postmodern).
Each of these stages of development occurred to humanity as a
whole, and repeats itself in essentially basic ways in individuals today,
with everybody starting at stage one and proceeding essentially up to
the average level of development in his or her culture (with some
individuals lower, some higher). Each of these general stages has a
different set of values, needs, motivations, morals, worldviews, ego
structures, societal types, cultural networks, and other fundamental
characteristics. The two basic transformations that I referred to above are
the last two in the series: the Pluralistic stage, emerging in the 1960s and
marking the beginning of Postmodernism, and more recently (and still
much more rarely) the Integral stage, newly emerging, and marking the
beginning of the phase—whatever it may turn out to be—that is moving
beyond Postmodernism and its basic tenets.
The profound difference I was alluding to is this: most earlier
books heralding a transformation of society speak from a Postmodern
perspective, and have a rather simplistic view of human evolution.
Laloux’s book speaks from an Integral perspective and is grounded in a
sophisticated understanding of evolutionary and developmental theory
and what in Integral theory is called AQAL (all quadrants, all levels).
Postmodernism, as the name suggests, is that general phase of
human development that came after, and in many cases strongly
criticized, the previous general phase of Modernism, which began in the
West with the Renaissance and then fully blossomed with the
Enlightenment—the “Age of Reason and Revolution.” What Enlight-
enment’s modernity brought to the scene was a move beyond the pre-
vious mythic-literal, religious, traditional era of development—where
the Bible was the one source of literal, uncontested truth; humanity had
one, and only one, savior; and “no one comes to salvation save by
through the Mother Church,” whose dogmas delivered truth on all
subjects, artistic to normative to scientific to religious. With the
Enlightenment, representative democracy replaced monarchy; freedom
replaced slavery (in a 100-year period, roughly 1770-1870, every rational-
industrial society on the planet outlawed slavery, the first time this had
ever happened to any societal type in human history); the experimental
modern sciences replaced the revelatory mythic religions (as sources of
serious truth); and what Weber called “the differentiation of the value
spheres” (the differentiation of art, morals, and science, so that each
could pursue its own logic and its own truths outside of their fusion in
the dogma of the Church; where the Churchmen refused to even look
through Galileo’s telescope, researchers by the hundreds and eventually
thousands began to do so, with an explosion in all of what are now
referred to as the “modern sciences”—geology, physics, chemistry,
biology, psychology, sociology).

Foreword xi
So successful were the modern sciences that the other major
domains of human existence and knowledge—from artistic to moral—
began to be invaded and colonized by scientism (the belief that science,
and science alone, can deliver any valuable truth). The “dignity of
modernity” (the differentiation of the value spheres) soon collapsed into
the “disaster of modernity” (the dissociation of the value spheres),
resulting in what Weber also famously called “the disenchanted
universe.”
Such was the state of affairs for some 300 years—a mixture of
great advance and stunning discoveries in the scientific arena,
accompanied with a reductionism and scientific materialism that
rendered all other fields and areas as defunct, outmoded, childish,
archaic. “Social Darwinism”—the notion of the survival of the fittest
applied to all aspects of human existence as well—began to insidiously
invade all the humanities, ethics, and politics of humans, including the
two major new economic systems, capitalism and socialism. Scientific
materialism—the idea that all phenomena in the universe (including
consciousness, culture, and creativity) could be reduced to material
atoms and their interactions, which could be known only by the
scientific method—and the generally liberal politics that accompanied
such beliefs, set the stage for the next three centuries.
Until the 1960s, when not only the reign of scientific materialism
was challenged (as being itself largely a cultural construction, not some
deified access to universal truths), but also all of the remaining
indignities of the Mythic-religious era (some of which were addressed
by Modernism, and some of which were exacerbated by it)—indignities
such as, overall, the oppression of women and other minorities, the toxic
despoliation of nature and the environment, the lack of evenly applied
civil rights, the general reign of materialism itself—all were aggressively
attacked, and attempted to be remedied, by Postmodernism. What
developmentalists have discovered about this new emergence is that it
was driven, in large measure, by the emergence of a new and more
developed stage of human unfolding (variously referred to as pluralistic,
individualistic, relativistic, postmodern). This is not to say that
everything Postmodernism pronounced was therefore true, only that it
was based on a mode of thinking that was more complex, more
sophisticated, more inclusive, and included more perspectives than the
typical formal rational structure of the Modern era (and the Modern
stage in today’s individual development).
This new, more inclusive stage of development drove the first
wave of books maintaining that “there’s-a-great-new-paradigm-and-
major-consciousness-transformation” now underway. These books,
which began to emerge in the 1970s and 1980s, and a few of which I
already named, usually had a very conspicuous diagram with two
columns—one was the “Old Paradigm,” which was “analytic-divisive,”

xii Reinventing Organizations
“Newtonian-Cartesian,” “abstract-intellectual,” “fragmented,” “mascu-
line,” and which was the cause of literally all of humanities’ problems,
from nuclear war to tooth decay, and then another column, the “New
Paradigm,” which was “organic,” “holistic,” “systemic,” “inclusive,”
and “feminine,” and which was the source of a radical salvation and
paradisiacal freedom from virtually all of humanity’s ills. What’s more,
these two choices—old paradigm and new paradigm—were the only
basic choices humanity had. Its earlier stages (e.g., tribal) were simply
earlier versions of the new paradigm, which was repressed and
destroyed by the aggressive Modern version of the old paradigm.
In large measure, these books were simply boomer writers
documenting the transformation that they had just been a part of—
namely, where, to the remains of the Magic, Mythic, and Rational
paradigms still in existence to varying degrees, was added the
possibility of the newly emergent Post-Rational or Postmodern
paradigm, to which the boomers were the first major generation to have
access (today in Western cultures, the Pluralistic/Postmodern stage
makes up around 20 percent of the population, with 30 to 40 percent still
Modern/Rational, 40 to 50 percent Mythic, and 10 percent Magic).
All of these early books had several things in common. By
dividing humanity’s choices into just two major ones—old and new
paradigms—they blamed all of humanity’s ills on nothing but
Modernity and the Enlightenment paradigm, severely distorting the
actual situation, which is that a majority of the really nasty cultural
problems faced by humanity are the result of the Mythic-literal
structure—from ethnocentric “chosen peoples,” to female oppression, to
slavery, to most warfare, to environmental destruction. In some cases,
Modern technology was added to those Mythic motivations, thus
making them more deadly (e.g., Auschwitz—which was not the product
of Modern worldcentric morals, which treat all people fairly, regardless of
race, color, sex, or creed, but Mythic ethnocentrism, which believes in out-
groups of infidels and in-groups of “chosen peoples,” and in which
infidels, lacking souls, can be murdered or killed, and jihad in one form
or another—from missionary converting to outright crusades—is the
order of the day). In many cases, Modernity was in the process of ending
these Mythic ethnocentric insults (such as slavery, and using a specific
Modern attitude of tolerance, a previously quite rare value), but
Postmodernity blamed Modernity (and rational Enlightenment values)
for all of it, thus, in many cases, making matters considerably worse.
But in other ways, Postmodernity, with its own higher
perspectives, brought not only advances in the sciences, but gave equal
emphasis to virtually all other disciplines as well (sometimes going
overboard, and claiming that no truth at all was possible, only various
interpretations, so of course all disciplines should be included). And in
its drives for civil rights and environmentalism and gay/lesbian rights

Foreword xiii
and rights for the disabled, the higher moral fabric at least possible with
a higher stage of development came clearly to the foreground. It was
these advances that all the “new paradigm” books were celebrating.
Who can blame them for getting carried away, and assuming the whole
world was headed into this Pluralistic phase, this “new paradigm,”
instead of seeing that that phase was simply the fourth or fifth major
transformation in human history and would simply take its place
alongside the others, not completely replace them? It still shared many
characteristics with its predecessors—all of which, together, Maslow
would say were driven by “deficiency needs” and Clare Graves’
followers would call “first tier.”
But developmentalists of the time began noticing something
initially perplexing, and then outright astonishing: among those that
developed to the Postmodern/Pluralistic stage, a small percentage (two
or three percent) began to show characteristics that were literally
unprecedented in human history. Graves called the emergence of this
even newer level “a monumental leap in meaning,” and Maslow referred
to it as the emergence of “Being values.” Where all the previous stages
(Magic, Mythic, Rational, and Pluralistic) had operated out of a sense of
lack, scarcity, and deficiency, this new level—which various researchers
began calling “integrated,” “integral,” “autonomous,” “second tier,”
“inclusive,” “systemic”—acted out of a sense of radical abundance, as if
it were overflowing with goodness, truth, and beauty. It was as if
somebody put a billion dollars in its psychological account, and all it
wanted to do was share it, so full it was.
And there was something else about it, too. Where all the first-tier
stages felt that their truth and values were the only real truth and values
in existence—all the others were mistaken, wrong, infantile, or just
goofy—this new Integral stage somehow intuited that all of the previous
value structures were true and important in their own ways, that all of
them had something to offer, that all of them were “true but partial.”
And thus, as much as the Postmodern/Pluralistic stage wanted to see
itself as being “all-inclusive,” it still essentially abhorred Rational and
Mythic values; but the Integral stage actually did include them, or
embrace them, or make room for them in its overall worldview. It was
the emergence, for the first time in history, of a truly inclusive and non-
marginalizing level of human consciousness. And this, indeed, would
change everything.
Slowly, but with increasing speed, a whole second generation of
“new paradigm” books began to emerge. These included such early
pioneers as James Mark Baldwin and Jean Gebser, but then, more
recently, books by philosophers, psychologists, and theologians such as
Jürgen Habermas, Abe Maslow, Bede Griffiths, Wayne Teasdale, Allan
Combs, and my own work, to barely scratch the surface. Unlike the first
wave of new paradigm books, this second wave had a much more

xiv Reinventing Organizations
sophisticated psychological component, including at least four or five
stages of development, sometimes nine or 10 (but certainly more than
two, the “old” and “new paradigm,” as the earlier wave had it); and—in
addition to those developmental levels, a series of developmental lines,
or multiple intelligences that moved through those levels (such as
cognitive intelligence, emotional intelligence, moral intelligence, kines-
thetic intelligence, spiritual intelligence, and so on). They also found
room for an integration of science and spirituality—not reducing one to
the other (nor seeing all spirituality as explainable by quantum
mechanics or brain neuroplasticity; nor seeing all science as reducible to
a mystical ground; but both science and spirituality being irreducible
domains of major importance). And they all saw the first wave of “new
paradigm” books as describing essentially the Postmodern/Pluralistic
stage, and not a genuine Integral/Systemic stage.
Frederic Laloux’s book belongs clearly to this second wave of
books. But that is not its major claim to significance. We have been
seeing, for the last decade or two, books increasingly focusing on
business and some sort of “new paradigm” (mostly still first-wave
books, but increasingly some second-wave books as well). But more than
any other book that I am aware of, Laloux’s work covers all four quad-
rants (to be explained later), at least five levels of consciousness and
culture, several multiple lines or intelligences, and various types of
organizational structures, moving from Magic to Mythic to Rational to
Pluralistic to Integral—and, of course, focusing on the last and most
recent emergent, that of the Integral stage, and a sophisticated and fairly
detailed description of the business organizations that seem built around
Integral-level characteristics, including individual worldviews, cultural
values, individual and collective behavior, and social structures,
processes, and practices. This makes it a truly pioneering work.
A brief explanation of “quadrants, levels, and lines” is perhaps in
order. As Laloux indicates, these technical aspects are taken from my
own Integral Theory, which, as the result of a cross-cultural search
through hundreds of premodern, modern, and postmodern cultures and
the various maps of human consciousness and culture that they have
offered, has come up with what might be thought of as a
“Comprehensive Map” of human makeup, which was arrived at by
putting all of the known maps together on the table, and then using each
one to fill in any gaps in the others, resulting in a comprehensive map
that is genuinely inclusive of the basic dimensions, levels, and lines that
are the major potentials of all humans. There are five basic dimensions in
this Framework—quadrants, levels of development, lines of develop-
ment, states of consciousness, and types.
Quadrants refer to four major perspectives through which any
phenomenon can be looked at: the interior and the exterior in the
individual and the collective. These can introductorily be indicated by

Foreword xv
the pronouns often used to describe them: the interior of the individual
is an “I” space (and includes all the subjective thoughts, feelings,
emotions, ideas, visions, and experiences that you might have as you
introspect); the interior of a collective is a “we” space (or the inter-
subjective shared values, semantics, norms, ethics, and understandings
that any group has—its “cultures” and “sub-cultures”); the exterior of an
individual is an “it” space (and includes all the “objective” or “scientific”
facts and data about your individual organism—one limbic system, two
lungs, two kidneys, one heart, this much dopamine, this much serotonin,
this much glucose, and so on—and includes not only “objective”
ingredients but behaviors); and the exterior of a collective, which is an
“its” space (and includes all the interobjective systems, processes, syntax,
rules, external relationships, techno-economic modes, ecological systems,
social practices, and so on).
Not only all human beings, but all their activities, disciplines, and
organizations can be looked at through this four-quadrant lens, and the
results are always illuminating. According to Integral Theory, any
comprehensive account of anything requires a look at all of these
perspectives—the first-person (“I”), second-person (“you” and “we”),
and third-person (“it” and “its”) perspectives. Most human disciplines
acknowledge only one or two of these quadrants and either ignore or
deny any real existence to the others. Thus, in consciousness studies, for
example, the field is fairly evenly divided between those who believe
consciousness is solely the product of Upper-Right or objective “it”
processes (namely, the human brain and its activities); while the other
half of the field believes consciousness itself (the Upper-Left or
subjective “I” space) is primary, and all objects (such as the brain) arise
in that consciousness field. Integral Theory maintains that both of those
views are right; that is, both of those quadrants (and the other two
quadrants) all arise together, simultaneously, and mutually influence
each other as correlative aspects of the Whole. Trying to reduce all of the
quadrants to one quadrant is “quadrant absolutism,” a wretched form of
reductionism that obscures much more than it clarifies; while seeing all
of the quadrants mutually arise and “tetra-evolve” sheds enormous light
on perpetually puzzling problems (from the body/mind problem to the
relation of science and spirituality to the mechanism of evolution itself).
Laloux carefully includes all four quadrants and a detailed
description of each as it appears in different organizational types,
focusing, again, on the pioneering or Integral stage. As he puts it, “The
four-quadrant model shows how deeply mindsets [Upper-Left or “I”],
culture [Lower-Left or “we”], behaviors [Upper-Right or “it”], and
systems [Lower-Right or “its”] are intertwined. A change in any one
dimension will ripple through all the others.” He goes on to point out
that Mythic and Modern theories of organization focus on “hard”
exterior facts (the two Right-hand quadrants), and the Postmodern

xvi Reinventing Organizations
introduced the interiors of mindsets and culture (the two Left-hand
quadrants)—while often going overboard, as Postmodernism in general
did, and claimed that only culture was important. Only Integral
organizations deliberately and consciously include all four quadrants (as
Laloux’s book itself is one of the very few to include all four quadrants
in its research). Many Integral writers, while fully aware of all the
quadrants, focus on the Left-hand quadrants of levels of consciousness
and worldviews, and leave out the Right-hand quadrants of behaviors,
processes, and practices necessary to help the emergence of Integral Left-
hand dimensions. Laloux points out, for example, that Integral organiza-
tional culture (Lower-Left “we”) is enacted particularly by Integral role-
modeling from those in the organization with moral authority (from the
Upper quadrant), and, from the Lower-Right or “its” quadrant,
supportive structures, processes, and practices.
As for levels and lines, Laloux states that “In their exploration,
[many researchers] found consistently that humanity evolves in stages.
Our knowledge about the stages of human development is now
extremely robust. Two thinkers in particular—Ken Wilber and Jenny
Wade—have done remarkable work comparing and contrasting all the
major stage models, and have discovered strong convergence. … The
way I portray the stages borrows mostly from Wade’s and Wilber’s
meta-analysis, touching briefly upon different facets of every stage—the
worldview, the needs, the cognitive development, the moral develop-
ment.”
Laloux rightly invites us to be extremely careful what we mean by
“a stage.” As Howard Gardner made popular, and virtually every
developmentalist agrees, there is not just one line of development with
its stages or levels, but multiple lines or multiple intelligences, and each
of those lines are quite different, with different characteristics and
different stage structures. But what’s so interesting is that although the
various lines are quite different, they all develop through the same basic
levels of consciousness. For the moment, let’s simply number the levels;
or, as Integral Theory often does, you can give them a color name (for
example, red, orange, or green). But let’s say that there are, in this
example, seven major developmental levels through which move, say, a
dozen different developmental lines (cognitive, emotional, moral,
values, needs, and spirituality, among others). Each line—say cognitive,
moral, emotional—evolves through each of the levels, so we can talk
about red cognition, red morals, red values (red being level 3). But
somebody at orange (level 5) cognition can also be at a red (level 3)
conventional moral development. So talking about levels without lines is
dangerous.
All of the multiple intelligences in humans develop through
actualization hierarchies. Cognition, for example, moves from sensori-
motor intelligence, to images, then symbols, then concepts, then schema,

Foreword xvii
then rules, then meta-rules, then systemic networks. This is a point
worth emphasizing, because Laloux’s book shows that organizations
operating at the Integral or teal stage no longer work with dominator
hierarchies, the boss-subordinate relationships that are pervasive in
organizations today. But the absence of dominator hierarchy is not the
same thing as the absence of any hierarchy. Even if we look at Graves’
work, for example, one of the major defining characteristics of Integral
or teal is the return of nested hierarchies, after their almost complete
removal at green Postmodern pluralism. (The Postmodernists utterly fail
to distinguish between dominator hierarchies, which are indeed nasty,
and actualization hierarchies, which are the primary form of natural
growth, development, and evolution in the world—atoms to molecules
to cells to organisms, for example. Postmodernists toss out all hierarchies
as being sheer evil. This is a characteristic of the egalitarian Pluralistic
stage and is one of its shadow sides.)
But with the emergence of the teal altitude, hierarchies are all over
the place—they’re literally everywhere. As Elliott Jacques’ works have
empirically demonstrated, the way most organizations are structured,
those at the lower levels of this hierarchy usually work on the floor or
assembly line; those at the intermediate levels mostly work middle
management; and those at the upper levels work upper management
(including CEO, CFO, COO). What these newer organizations do is
move all of those levels—the entire hierarchy itself—into teams of
usually 10 to 15 people. Any person, in any team, can make literally any
decision for the company—and, in fact, virtually all the major decisions
in the organizations are made by team members—including sales,
marketing, hiring and recruitment, research and development, salary
decisions, dismissals, HR functions, equipment purchases, community
relations, and so on. This makes each team, and each person in the team,
much more Integral—they can operate on any level in the hierarchy they
are capable of, as long as they consult with those who will be affected by
the decision (although they don’t have to follow the advice), where
previously they had been constrained by their place in the pyramid. One
of the great findings of Laloux’s work is that actualization hierarchies
can flourish when dominator hierarchies are removed. A company of
500 individuals thus has, not one but 500 CEO, any one of whom might
have a breakthrough idea and be able to implement it, a true self-
management move that is one of the major reasons for the astonishing
success of so many of these organizations. What happens to middle and
much of upper management? Mostly, it doesn’t exist. Those hierarchies
have been relocated.
This work is, as I said, one of the most important books in the
entire second wave of “new paradigm” books. As Laloux is the first to
admit, we don’t know if all the characteristics, processes, and practices

xviii Reinventing Organizations
that he describes will end up actually describing the structure and form
that teal organizations will take. But this research deserves to be taken
seriously by every Integral, indeed every conventional, student of
organizations and organizational development. In terms of AQAL (all-
quadrant, all-level) sophistication, there is simply nothing like it out
there. My congratulations to Frederic Laloux on a spectacular treatise.
May it help many readers gather inspiration to create businesses,
schools, hospitals, or nonprofits inspired by this emerging new wave of
consciousness that is starting to transform the world.
Ken Wilber
Denver, Colorado
Fall 2013

Introduction • The emergence of a new organizational model 1
INTRODUCTION)
THE!EMERGENCE!OF!A!!
NEW!ORGANIZATIONAL!MODEL!
You never change things by fighting the existing
reality. To change something, build a new model
that makes the existing model obsolete.
Richard Buckminster Fuller
Aristotle, the great Greek philosopher and scientist, proclaimed in
a treatise written in 350 BC that women have fewer teeth than men.
1
Today we know this is nonsense. But for almost 2,000 years, it was
accepted wisdom in the Western World. Then one day, someone had the
most revolutionary of ideas: let’s count!
The scientific method―formulating a hypothesis and then testing
it―is so deeply ingrained in our thinking that we find it hard to
conceive that intelligent people would blindly trust authority and not
put assumptions to the test. We could be forgiven for thinking that,
perhaps, people simply weren’t that smart back then! But before we
judge them too harshly, let’s ask ourselves: could future generations be
similarly amused about us? Could we, too, be prisoners of a simplistic
way of understanding the world?
There is reason to believe we might be. As an example, let me ask
you a simple question: How many brains does a human being have? I
imagine your answer is “one” (or, if you suspected a trick question, it
might be “two,” the often-referred-to right and left brains). Our current
knowledge is that we have three: there is of course the massive brain in
our head; then there is a small brain in our heart, and another in our gut.

2 Reinventing Organizations
The last two are comparatively much smaller
2
, but they are fully
autonomous nervous systems nevertheless.
Here is where it gets interesting: The brain in the heart and the
one in the gut were discovered only recently, even though from a
technological point of view, they could have been identified long ago.
All it takes to see them is a corpse, a knife, and a basic microscope.
Actually, the brain in the gut was discovered long ago, in the 1860s, by a
German doctor named Auerbach. His discovery was further refined by
two English colleagues, Bayliss and Starling. And then, something
extraordinary happened. Medical circles somehow forgot about the
brain in the gut. For a century, they completely lost sight of it! It was
rediscovered only in the late 1990s by Michael Gerson, an American
neuroscientist, along with others.
How could medical circles forget the existence of a brain? I believe
it has to do with the belief system of our times: in a hierarchical
worldview, there can be only one brain in command, just as there must
be a single boss at the head of every organization. Although popular
parlance has long used the terminology of “knowing in our hearts” and
“knowing in our gut,” having three autonomous brains working side by
side can’t be possible if we believe the world needs clear hierarchies to
function. It might be no coincidence that we discovered (or rediscovered)
the other two brains at the same time as the Internet became a dominant
force in our lives. The age of the Internet has precipitated a new
worldview―one that can contemplate the possibility of distributed
intelligence instead of top-down hierarchy. With that worldview, we can
accommodate the idea that we have more than one brain and that they
can work together in shared intelligence.
We can’t quite understand how people in the Middle Ages
believed Aristotle’s claim that women had fewer teeth than men. And
yet, it seems we can be prisoners of our thoughts just as much as they
were. Modern scientists neglected to look carefully through the
microscope because “there can only be one brain,” rather like Galileo’s
contemporaries refused to look through the telescope because it was
unthinkable that our God-formed planet would be anything other than
the center of the universe.
The limits of our current organizational models
My interest is in organizations and collaboration, not medicine or
astronomy. But the conceptual question is the same: could it be that our
current worldview limits the way we think about organizations? Could
we invent a more powerful, more soulful, more meaningful way to work
together, if only we change our belief system?
In many ways, this is a strange and almost ungrateful question to
ask. For thousands and thousands of years, people have lived on the
brink of famine and in fear of plagues, always at the mercy of a drought
or a simple flu. Then suddenly, almost out of nowhere, modernity has

Introduction • The emergence of a new organizational model 3
brought us unprecedented wealth and life expectancy in the last two
centuries. And all this extraordinary progress has come not from
individuals acting alone, but from people collaborating in organizations:
• The large and small businesses in our free-market economies have
created unprecedented wealth in the Western world, and they are
currently lifting millions of people out of poverty in India, China,
Africa, and elsewhere. We have built up incredibly intricate
supply chains, which increasingly link every human being in rela-
tionships that arguably do more for peace between nations than
any political arrangement ever has.
• A dense network of organizations―research centers, pharma-
ceutical companies, hospitals, medical schools, health insurance
companies―have meshed into a highly sophisticated medical
system that would have been unthinkable just a century ago. Over
the last century, this network contributed to adding nearly 20
years of life expectancy for the average person in the United
States. Infant mortality has been reduced by 90 percent and
maternal mortality by 99 percent. Age-old scourges like polio,
leprosy, smallpox, and tuberculosis are mostly part of history
books, even in the poorest countries in the world.
• In the field of education, a network of schools―kindergartens,
elementary and high schools, colleges, and graduate
schools―have brought education that was once the privilege of
the very few to millions of children and youth. Never before in
human history have there been free public education systems
available to every child. The high degrees of literacy that we now
take for granted are unprecedented in history.
• All around the world, the nonprofit sector has grown spectac-
ularly for several decades, creating jobs at a faster pace than for-
profit companies. An ever-increasing number of people donate
time, energy, and money in pursuit of purposes that matter to
them and to the world.
Modern organizations have brought about sensational progress for
humanity in less than two centuries―the blink of an eye in the overall
timeline of our species. None of the recent advances in human history
would have been possible without organizations as vehicles for human
collaboration.
And yet, many people sense that the current way we run
organizations has been stretched to its limits. We are increasingly
disillusioned by organizational life. For people who toil away at the
bottom of the pyramids, surveys consistently report that work is more
often than not dread and drudgery, not passion or purpose. That the
Dilbert cartoons could become cultural icons says much about the extent
to which organizations can make work miserable and pointless. And it’s
not only at the bottom of the pyramid. There is a dirty secret I have

4 Reinventing Organizations
discovered in the fifteen years I have spent consulting and coaching
organizational leaders: life at the top of the pyramids isn’t much more
fulfilling. Behind the façade and the bravado, the lives of powerful
corporate leaders are ones of quiet suffering too. Their frantic activity is
often a poor cover up for a deep inner sense of emptiness. The power
games, the politics, and the infighting end up taking their toll on
everybody. At both the top and bottom, organizations are more often
than not playfields for unfulfilling pursuits of our egos, inhospitable to
the deeper yearnings of our souls.
This book isn’t a rant about large corporations gone mad with
greed. People who work in government agencies or nonprofits are rarely
more exuberant about their workplaces. Even professions of calling
aren’t immune to organizational dis-
illusionment. Teachers, doctors, and
nurses are leaving their field of voca-
tion in droves. Our schools, unfor-
tunately, are for the most part soulless
machines where students and teachers
simply go through the motions. We
have turned hospitals into cold, bureau-
cratic institutions that dispossess doc-
tors and nurses of their capacity to care from the heart.
The questions that triggered the research for this book
The way we try to deal with organizations’ current problems often
seems to make things worse, not better. Most organizations have gone
through many rounds of change programs, mergers, centralizations and
decentralizations, new IT systems, new mission statements, new
scorecards, or new incentive systems. It feels like we have stretched the
current way we run organizations to its limits, and these traditional
recipes often seem part of the problem, not the solution.
We yearn for more, for radically better ways to be in
organizations. But is that genuinely possible, or mere wishful thinking?
If it turns out that it is possible to create organizations that draw out
more of our human potential, then what do such organizations look like?
How do we bring them to life? These are the questions at the heart of
this book.
To me, these are not merely academic but very practical questions.
An increasing number of us yearn to create soulful organizations, if only
we knew how. Many of us don’t need convincing that new types of
companies, schools, and hospitals are called for. What we need is faith
that it can be done and answers to some very concrete questions. The
hierarchical pyramid feels outdated, but what other structure could
replace it? How about decision-making? Everybody should make
meaningful decisions, not just a few higher-ups, but isn’t that just a
recipe for chaos? How about promotions and salary increases? Can we
Instinctively, we know that management
is out of date. We know its rituals and
routines look slightly ridiculous in the
dawning light of the 21st century. That’s
why the antics in a Dilbert cartoon or an
episode of The Office are at once
familiar and cringe-making.$
Gary Hamel

Introduction • The emergence of a new organizational model 5
find ways to handle such matters without bringing politics to the table?
How can we have meetings that are productive and uplifting, where we
speak from our hearts and not from our egos? How can we make
purpose central to everything we do, and avoid the cynicism that lofty-
sounding mission statements often inspire? What we need is not merely
some grand vision of a new type of organization. We need concrete
answers to dozens of practical questions like these.
Taking this practical perspective does not preclude us from also
considering much larger societal and environmental implications. Our
way of conducting business has outgrown our planet. Our organizations
contribute on a massive scale to depleting
natural resources, destroying ecosystems,
changing the climate, exhausting water
reserves and precious topsoils. We are play-
ing a game of brinkmanship with the future,
betting that more technology will heal the
scars modernity has inflicted on the planet.
Economically, a model of ever more growth with finite resources is
bound to hit the wall; the recent financial crises are possibly only
tremors of larger earthquakes to come. It is probably no exaggeration,
but sad reality, that the very survival of many species, ecosystems, and
perhaps the human race itself hinges on our ability to move to higher
forms of consciousness and from there collaborate in new ways to heal
our relationship with the world and the damage we’ve caused.
Organizations over the course of evolution (Part 1)
Einstein once famously said that problems couldn’t be solved with
the same level of consciousness that created them in the first place.
Perhaps we need to access a new stage of consciousness, a new world-
view, to reinvent human organizations. To some people, the notion that
society could shift to another worldview, and that from that worldview
we could create a radically new type of organization, might pass for
wishful thinking. And yet, this is precisely what has happened several
times in human history, and there are elements that hint that another
change of mindset―and thus another organizational model―may be
just around the corner.
A great number of scholars―psychologists, philosophers, and
anthropologists, among others―have dissected the journey of human
consciousness. They found that in the roughly 100,000-year history of
humanity, we have gone through a number of successive stages. At
every stage we made a leap in our abilities―cognitively, morally, and
psychologically―to deal with the world. There is one important aspect
that researchers have so far somewhat overlooked: every time humanity
has shifted to a new stage, it has invented a new way to collaborate, a
new organizational model. Part 1 of this book recounts this story: how
humanity’s consciousness evolved, and how at every step of the way we
The greatest danger in times of
turbulence is not the
turbulence―it is to act with
yesterday’s logic.
Peter Drucker

6 Reinventing Organizations
have invented new organizational models. (Those successive models are
still around today, so this historical perspective has much to offer
toward understanding today’s various types of organizations and many
of today’s debates in the field of management.)
Here is where things become particularly intriguing: develop-
mental psychology has much to say about the next stage of human
consciousness, the one we are just starting to transition into. This next
stage involves taming our ego and searching for more authentic, more
wholesome ways of being. If the past is any guide to the future, then as
we grow into the next stage of consciousness, we will also develop a
corresponding organizational model.
Empirical research―what pioneers can teach us (Part 2)
The second part of the book describes in practical detail how
organizations operate at this next stage. It so happens that the future is
not just around the corner―it is already blending into the present. For
two years, I have researched pioneer organizations that have already, to
a significant degree, started operating on a new organizational model
consistent with the next stage of human development. The questions I
was trying to answer as I started researching these pioneer organizations
were these:
What do organizations molded around the next stage of
consciousness look and feel like? Is it already possible to describe their
structures, practices, processes, and cultures (in other words, to con-
ceptualize the organizational model) in useful detail, to help other people
set up similar organizations?
I didn’t know what to expect when I set out to identify pioneer
organizations. This field is only emerging; would I find any good
examples? Would I stumble only on tiny organizations, with too little
history to get to any meaningful insights? I felt that rather strict selection
criteria were needed in any case―otherwise there might not be much
value in the claims the study would make. To be included in this
research, organizations could stem from any geographical area or sector
(business, nonprofit, education, health, government), but needed to
employ$ a minimum of 100 people,
3 
and to have been operating for a
minimum of five years along structures, practices, processes, and cultures
that to a substantial degree were consistent with the characteristics of the
next developmental stage.
My concerns proved unfounded. The twelve organizations I
researched (see chapter 2.1 for an overview) overshoot these criteria by a
long shot. Many have been operating on these breakthrough principles
for a long time, sometimes 30 or 40 years, and not just with a handful,
but with a few hundred and sometimes several thousand employees.
Another surprise: I was expecting to find case examples mostly in
service professions―health care or education―where work is often a

Introduction • The emergence of a new organizational model 7
calling, and the organization’s noble purpose helps people transcend
their more selfish motivations. I was happy to be proven wrong. Among
the pioneers are for-profit as well as nonprofit organizations. There are
retailers, manufacturing companies, an energy company, and a food
producer, as well as a school and a group of hospitals.
I was also surprised to discover that these organizations didn’t
know about each other. I had expected, if I found any such pioneers, that
they would know about like-minded peers with whom they would
exchange insights and experiences. Instead, they were generally
delighted to hear that they weren’t the only ones out there questioning
today’s management practices. I came to jokingly think about these
organizations as friendly aliens from some old TV series, living right
among us for quite a while now, endowed with superpowers but
isolated and unrecognized. Perhaps the times are catching up with them;
perhaps we are now finally ready to see them for what they are: not
merely as friendly but awkward outliers, but as pioneers of our
collective future.
Researching these case studies involved two sets of questions
(listed in Appendix 1). The first set relates to 45 practices and processes
that are commonly discussed in organizational research. They connect
to:
• key overarching organizational processes such as strategy, market-
ing, sales, operations, budgeting, and controlling;
• the main human resources processes, including recruitment, train-
ing, evaluation, compensation; and
• critical practices of everyday life like meetings, information flow,
and office spaces.
For each of these 45 areas, the research tried to identify in what
ways the practices of the pioneers differ―or don’t―from conventional
management methods. The approach was deliberately broad and open-
ended: given the emerging nature of the topic, the research looked at the
entire spectrum of structures, practices, and cultures typically considered
in organizational research, without preconceived notions. It relied upon
publicly available material, internal documents, interviews, and onsite
visits.
Spoiler alert
Each of the pioneer organizations is astonishing in its own right
and would warrant an entire book to tell its story. But of course, as part
of the research, I was curious if there was more to it than a collection of
case studies: are there patterns and commonalities that point to a
coherent new model? Can the pioneers provide not just inspiration, but a
template for those aspiring to create more soulful types of organizations?
The answer, clearly, is positive. These pioneer organizations didn’t
know about each other and experimented on their own; they work in
radically different sectors and locations; some have hundreds, others

8 Reinventing Organizations
tens of thousands, of employees. Despite all this, they have―after much
trial and error―come up with strikingly similar structures and practices.
I find it difficult not to get excited about this. It means that a coherent
organizational model seems to be emerging,
one we can describe in quite some detail. This
is not a theoretical model, not a utopian idea,
but a very concrete way to run organizations
from a higher stage of consciousness. If we
accept that there is a direction to human evolu-
tion, then we hold here something rather ex-
traordinary: the blueprint of the future of organizations, the blueprint to
the future of work itself.
I write this with full awareness that we are in the early days of
this emerging phenomenon. I don’t mean to suggest that this book offers
a definitive, fixed description of this upcoming organizational model. As
more companies start to innovate in this field, as more researchers look
at them from different angles, and as society as a whole evolves, more
richness and texture will certainly be added to the picture. But I am
confident that, even now, we hold a blueprint for how we can organize
entities in ways that make work vastly more productive, fulfilling, and
purposeful. Organizational leaders who want to create new types of
organizations don’t have to start from a blank sheet of paper; they can
draw inspiration from the very concrete descriptions in Part 2 of this
book outlining the principles, structures, practices, and cultures that
support a new way to come together in organizations.
Necessary conditions (Part 3)
The research for this book has also yielded interesting insights
concerning the journey to bring such new organizations to life (based on
a second set of research questions―see Appendix 1). What are the
necessary conditions to making this new model work? If you are
planning to start up an organization and want to, from the beginning,
eschew the old model and start on a new foundation, what can you learn
from pioneers who have done this before? Or, if you lead an existing
organization, large or small, and consider transitioning to this new
paradigm, what would be good ways to get started and to engage
colleagues in that journey? These are some of the questions addressed in
Part 3 of the book.
If we are to overcome the daunting problems of our times, we will
need new types of organizations―more purposeful businesses, more
soulful schools, more productive nonprofits. Anybody breaking out of
the mold and venturing into the new is likely to meet resistance, to be
called an idealist or a fool. Anthropologist Margaret Meade once said,
“Never underestimate the power of a few committed people to change
the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.” If you are one of
Organizations researched for
this book are like aliens from
some old TV series―living
right among us, unrecognized
despite their superpowers.

Introduction • The emergence of a new organizational model 9
them, if you feel called to create a radically more soulful, purposeful,
and productive workplace, then I hope that this book will provide you
with some extra confidence that it can be done. May it serve as a
practical handbook along your journey. I have no doubt that the world is
ready and waiting for you.



!
!
!
Part 1
$
Historical and
Developmental Perspective



Chapter 1.1 • Changing paradigms 13
CHAPTER)1.1)
CHANGING!PARADIGMS:!!
PAST!AND!PRESENT!
!ORGANIZATIONAL!MODELS!
Seeing is not believing; believing is seeing!
You see things, not as they are, but as you are.
Eric Butterworth
Can we create organizations free of the pathologies that show up
all too often in the workplace? Free of politics, bureaucracy, and
infighting; free of stress and burnout; free of resignation, resentment,
and apathy; free of the posturing at the top and the drudgery at the
bottom? Is it possible to reinvent organizations, to devise a new model
that makes work productive, fulfilling, and meaningful? Can we create
soulful workplaces―schools, hospitals, businesses, and nonprofits―where
our talents can blossom and our callings can be honored?
If you are the founder or leader of an organization and you long
to create a different workplace, much rides on your answer to that
question! Many people around you will dismiss this idea as wishful
thinking and try to talk you out of even trying. “People are people,” they
will say. “We have egos, we play politics, we like to blame, criticize, and
spread rumors. This will never change.” Who can argue with that? But,
on the other hand, we have all experienced peak moments of teamwork,
where achievements came joyfully and effortlessly. Human ingenuity
knows no bounds and radical innovations sometimes appear all of a
sudden, out of nowhere. Who would wager we cannot invent much
more exciting workplaces?
So which voice should you heed? Is it possible to set a course
away from the land of management-as-we-know-it for a new world? Or

14 Reinventing Organizations
are you just going to sail off the edge, because there is nothing beyond
the world we know?
Part of the answer, I have found somewhat unexpectedly, comes
from looking not forward, but into the past. In the course of history,
humankind has reinvented how people come together to get work done
a number of times―every time creating a vastly superior new
organizational model. What’s more, this historical perspective also hints
at a new organizational model that might be just around the corner,
waiting to emerge.
The key to this historical perspective, interestingly, comes not
from the field of organizational history, but more broadly from the field
of human history and developmental psychology. It turns out that,
throughout history, the types of organizations we have invented were
tied to the prevailing worldview and consciousness. Every time that we,
as a species, have changed the way we think about the world, we have
come up with more powerful types of organizations.
A great number of people―historians, anthropologists, philo-
sophers, mystics, psychologists, and neuroscientists―have delved into
this most fascinating question: how has humanity evolved from the earliest
forms of human consciousness to the complex consciousness of modern times?
(Some inquired into a related question: how do we human beings evolve
today from the comparatively simple form of consciousness we have at birth to
the full extent of adult maturity?)
People have looked at these questions from every possible angle.
Abraham Maslow famously looked at how human needs evolve along
the human journey, from basic physiological needs to self-actualization.
Others looked at development through the lenses of worldviews (Gebser,
among others), cognitive capacities (Piaget), values (Graves), moral
development (Kohlberg, Gilligan), self-identity (Loevinger), spirituality
(Fowler), leadership (Cook-Greuter, Kegan, Torbert), and so on.
In their exploration, they found consistently that humanity evolves
in stages. We are not like trees that grow continuously. We evolve by
sudden transformations, like a caterpillar that becomes a butterfly, or a
tadpole a frog. Our knowledge about the stages of human development
is now extremely robust. Two thinkers in particular―Ken Wilber and
Jenny Wade―have done remarkable work comparing and contrasting
all the major stage models and have discovered strong convergence.
Every model might look at one side of the mountain (one looks at needs,
another at cognition, for instance), but it’s the same mountain. They may
give somewhat different names to the stages or sometimes subdivide or
regroup them differently. But the underlying phenomenon is the same,
just like Fahrenheit and Celsius recognize―with different labels―that
there is a point at which water freezes and another where it boils. This
developmental view has been backed up by solid evidence from large
pools of data; academics like Jane Loevinger, Susanne Cook-Greuter, Bill
Torbert, and Robert Kegan have tested this stage theory with thousands

Chapter 1.1 • Changing paradigms 15
and thousands of people in several cultures, in organizational and
corporate settings, among others.
Every transition to a new stage of consciousness has ushered in a
whole new era in human history. At every juncture, everything changed:
society (going from family bands to tribes to
empires to nation states); the economy (from
foraging to horticulture, agriculture, and indus-
trialization); the power structures; the role of
religion. One aspect hasn’t yet received much
attention: with every new stage in human
consciousness also came a break-through in
our ability to collaborate, bringing about a new
organizational model. Organizations as we know
them today are simply the expression of our
current world-view, our current stage of development. There have been
other models before, and all evidence indicates there are more to come.
So what are the past and current organizational models in human
history―and what might the next look like? In this chapter, I will take
you on a whirlwind tour of the major stages in the development of
human consciousness and of the corresponding organizational models.
The way I portray the stages borrows from many researchers, and
primarily from Wade’s and Wilber’s meta-analyses, touching briefly
upon different facets of every stage―the worldview, the needs, the
cognitive development, the moral develop-ment. I refer to every stage,
and to the corresponding organizational model, with both a name and
a color. Naming the stages is always a struggle; a single adjective will
never be able to capture all of the com-plex reality of a stage of human
consciousness. I’ve chosen adjectives I feel are the most evocative for
each stage, in some cases borrowing a label from an existing stage
theory, in other cases choosing a label of my own making. Integral
Theory often refers to stages not with a name but with a color. Certain
people find this color-coding to be highly memo-rable, and for that
reason I’ll often refer to a stage throughout this book with the
corresponding color (which should not obscure the fact―let’s add this to
avoid any misunderstanding―that the way I describe the stages of
consciousness stems from a personal synthesis of the work of different
scholars, which while generally compatible might not always square
entirely with the way Integral Theory describes the same stages).
Reactive―Infrared paradigm
1
!
This is the earliest developmental stage of humanity, spanning
roughly the period from 100,000 to 50,000 BC, when we lived in small
bands of family kinships (some of which survive in remote parts of the
world today, which accounts for our knowledge of this stage). These
Philosophers, mystics from
many wisdom traditions,
psychologists, and
neuroscientists have all delved
into this most fascinating
question: how has human
consciousness evolved from the
time we lived in caves
to who we are today?

16 Reinventing Organizations
bands typically number just a few dozen people. Beyond that number,
things start to break down, as people’s capacity to handle complexity in
relationships is very limited at this stage. The ego is not fully formed;
people don’t perceive themselves as entirely distinct from others or from
the environment (which causes some to romanticize about this period,
seeing it as pre-dualism bliss, ignoring the extremely high rate of vio-
lence and murder at this stage). Foraging is the basis of subsistence. This
model requires no division of labor to speak of (other than women
taking responsibility for the bearing and rearing of children), and so
there is nothing like an organizational model at that stage yet. In fact,
there is no hierarchy within the band―there is no elder, no chief that
provides leadership.
There are only a few remaining bands of people operating from
this paradigm in the world today. However, child psychologists study
what amounts to the same stage in newborn babies, who engage with
the world via a comparable form of consciousness, where the concept of
self isn’t yet fully separate from the mother and the environment.
Magic―Magenta paradigm
2
!
Around 15,000 years ago, and perhaps earlier in some places of
the world, humanity started to shift to a stage of consciousness some
authors have labeled “magical.” This stage corresponds to the shift from
small family bands to tribes of up to a few hundred people. Psycho-
logically and cognitively, this represents a major step up in the ability to
handle complexity. The self at this stage is to a large degree differen-
tiated physically and emotionally from others, but it still sees itself
very much the center of the universe. Cause and effect are poorly
understood, and so the universe is full of spirits and magic: clouds move
to follow me; bad weather is the spirits’ punishment for my bad actions. To
appease this magical world, tribes seek comfort in ritualistic behaviors
and by following the elder and the shaman. People live mostly in the
present, with some blending in of the past, but little projection toward
the future. Cognitively, there is no abstraction yet, no classification, no
concept of large numbers. Death is not seen as particularly real, and
the fear of one’s death is markedly absent (which accounts for con-
tinuing high rates of violence and murder). Organizations don’t exist at
this stage yet. Task differentiation remains extremely limited, although
elders have special status and command some degree of authority.
Today, this stage is typically experienced by children of around
three to 24 months of age. This is when they acquire sensorimotor differ-
entiation (when I bite my finger it’s not the same as when I bite the blanket)
and emotional differentiation (I’m not my mother, though in her presence I
feel magically safe). With adequate nurture, most children grow beyond
this stage.

Chapter 1.1 • Changing paradigms 17
Impulsive―Red paradigm
3
!
Historically, the shift to the Impulsive-Red paradigm was another
major step up for humanity. It brought forth the first chiefdoms and
proto-empires, around 10,000 years ago. From it also emerged the first
forms of organizational life (which I’ll refer to as Red Organizations).
The ego is now fully hatched, and people have a sense of self that
is entirely separate from others and from the world. At first, this
realization is frightening: for the first time, death is real. If I’m just a small
part, separate from the whole, I might suffer or die. The world at this stage is
seen as a dangerous place where one’s needs being met depends on
being strong and tough. The currency of the world is power. If I’m more
powerful than you, I can demand that my needs are met; if you are more
powerful than me, I’ll submit in the hope you will take care of me. The
emotional spectrum is still rather crude, and people often express their
needs through tantrums and violence. One is largely unaware of other
people’s feelings. The orientation is still mostly to the present―I want it,
and I want it now―but this impulsiveness can extend somewhat into the
future with simple strategies using power, manipulation, or submission.
Simple causal relationships such as rewards and punishments are
understood. Thinking is shaped by polar opposites, which makes for a
black and white worldview―for example, strong/weak, my way/your
way.
With ego-differentiation, role differentiation becomes possible―in
other words, meaningful division of labor. There is now a chief, and
there are foot soldiers. Slavery enters the picture on a large scale, now
that tasks can be isolated and given to enemies from neighboring tribes
that have been defeated and put into bondage. Historically, this has led
to the emergence of chiefdoms ruling not only hundreds, but up to
thousands or tens of thousands of people. Impulsive-Red functioning
can still be found in adults in many tribal societies in the world today
and in underprivileged areas amidst developed societies, when
circumstances don’t provide adequate nurture for children to develop
beyond this stage. Every paradigm has its sweet spot, a context in which
it is most appropriate. Impulsive-Red is highly suitable for hostile
environments: combat zones, civil wars, failed states, prisons, or violent
inner-city neighborhoods.
Red Organizations
Organizations molded in Impulsive-Red consciousness first
appeared in the form of small conquering armies, when the more
powerful chiefdoms grew into proto-empires. They can still be found
today in the form of street gangs and mafias. Today’s Red Organizations
borrow tools and ideas from modernity―think about organized crime’s

18 Reinventing Organizations
use of weaponry and information technology. But their structures and
practices are for the most part still molded in the Impulsive-Red paradigm.
What are the defining characteristics of Red Organizations? Their
glue is the continuous exercise of power in interpersonal relationships.
Wolf packs provide a good metaphor: rather like the “alpha wolf” uses
power when needed to maintain his status within the pack,
4 
the chief of
a Red Organization must demonstrate overwhelming power and bend
others to his will to stay in position. The minute his power is in doubt,
someone else will attempt to topple him. To provide some stability, the
chief surrounds himself with family members (who tend to be more
loyal) and buys their allegiance by sharing the spoils. Each member of
his close guard in turn looks after his own people and keeps them in
line. Overall, there is no formal hierarchy and there are no job titles.
Impulsive-Red Organizations don’t scale well for those reasons―they
rarely manage to keep in line people who are separated from the chief by
more than three or four degrees. While Red Organizations can be
extremely powerful (especially in hostile environments where later stages
of organizations tend to break down), they are inherently fragile, due to
the impulsive nature of people’s way of operating (I want it so I take it).
The chief must regularly resort to public displays of cruelty and punish-
ment, as only fear and submission keep the organization from disinte-
grating. Mythical stories about his absolute power frequently make the
rounds, to keep foot soldiers from vying for a higher prize.
Present-centeredness makes Red Organizations poor at planning
and strategizing but highly reactive to new threats and opportunities that
they can pursue ruthlessly. They are therefore well adapted to chaotic
environments (in civil wars or in failed states) but are ill-suited to
achieve complex outcomes in stable environments where planning and
strategizing are possible.
Conformist―Amber paradigm
5
!
Every paradigm shift opens up unprecedented new capabilities
and possibilities. When Conformist-Amber consciousness emerged,
humankind leaped from a tribal world subsisting on horticulture to the
age of agriculture, states and civilizations, institutions, bureaucracies,
and organized religions. According to developmental psychologists, a
large share of today’s adult population in developed societies operates
from this paradigm.
At the Conformist-Amber stage, reality is perceived through
Newtonian eyes. Cause and effect are understood,
6 
people can grasp
linear time (past, present, future) and project into the future. This is the
soil from which agriculture could emerge: farming requires the self-
discipline and foresight to keep seeds from this year’s harvest to provide
for next year’s food. The caloric surplus generated by agriculture allowed
for feeding a class of rulers, administrators, priests, warriors, and crafts-

Chapter 1.1 • Changing paradigms 19
men; this brought about the shift from chiefdom to states and civiliza-
tions, starting around 4000 BC in Mesopotamia.
Conformist-Amber consciousness develops a deeper awareness of
other people’s feelings and perceptions. Piaget, the pioneer child psy-
chologist, has given us a defining experiment of Conformist-Amber
cognition. A two-colored ball is placed between a child and an adult,
with the green side facing the child and the red side facing the adult.
Prior to the Amber stage, a child cannot yet see the world from someone
else’s perspective, and he will claim that both he and the adult see a
green ball. At the age of around six or seven, a child raised in a nurturing
environment will learn to see the world through someone else’s eyes and
will correctly identify that the adult sees the red side of the ball.
Psychologically, the implications are enormous. I can identify
with my perspective and my role and see it as different from yours. I can
also imagine how others view me. My ego and sense of self-worth are
now very much based on other people’s opinions. I will strive for
approval, acceptance, and belonging in my social circle. People at this
stage internalize group norms, and the thinking is dominated by
whether one has the right appearance, behaviors, and thoughts to fit in.
The dualistic thinking of Red is still present, but the individual “my way
or your way” is replaced with a collective “us or them.” Red egocentrism
has given way to Amber ethnocentrism. Ken Wilber puts it this way:
Care and concern are expanded from me to the group―but no
further! If you are a member of the group―a member of … my mythol-
ogy, my ideology―then you are “saved” as well. But if you belong to a
different culture, a different group, a different mythology, a different god,
then you are damned.
7
In Conformist-Amber, the formerly impulsive Red self is now able
to exercise self-discipline and self-control, not only in public but also in
private. Amber societies have simple morals based on one accepted,
right way of doing things. The Conformist-Amber worldview is static:
there are immutable laws that make for a just world, where things are
either right or wrong. Do what’s right and you will be rewarded, in this
life or the next. Do or say the wrong things, and you will be punished or
even rejected from the group―and possibly suffer in the hereafter.
People internalize the rules and morality and feel guilt and shame when
they go astray. Authority to define what is right and wrong is now
linked to a role, rather than to a powerful personality (as was the case in
Red); it’s the priest’s robe, whoever wears it, that defines authority.
Any major change of perspective, like the change from Red to
Amber, is both liberating and frightening. To feel safe in a world of
causality, linear time, and awareness of other people’s perspectives, the
Amber ego seeks for order, stability, and predictability. It seeks to create
control through institutions and bureaucracies. It finds refuge in strictly

20 Reinventing Organizations
defined roles and identities. Amber societies tend to be highly stratified,
with social classes or caste systems and rigid gender differences as
defining features. A lottery at birth defines what caste you are born into.
From there, everything is mapped out for you―how you are to behave,
think, dress, eat, and marry is in accordance with your caste.
With so much in flux in the world today, some find Amber
certainties an appealing refuge and call for a return to a fixed set of
moral values. To take that perspective is to ignore the massive inequality
of traditional societies that set strict social and sexual norms. It can be
unpleasant, to say the least, to be a woman, a homosexual, an untouch-
able, or a free thinker in a Conformist-Amber society.
Amber Organizations
The advent of Amber Organizations brought about two major
breakthroughs: organizations can now plan for the medium and long term,
and they can create organizational structures that are stable and can scale.
Combine these two breakthroughs, and you get organizations able to
achieve unprecedented outcomes, beyond anything Red Organizations
could have even contemplated. Historically, Amber Organizations are
the ones that have built irrigation systems, pyramids, and the Great Wall
of China. Conformist-Amber Organizations ran the ships, the trading
posts, and the plantations of the Colonial world. The Catholic Church is
built on this paradigm―arguably it has been the defining Amber
Organization for the Western world. The first large corporations of the
Industrial Revolution were run on this template. Amber Organizations
are still very present today: most government agencies, public schools,
religious institutions, and the military are run based on Conformist-
Amber principles and practices.
Amber breakthrough 1: Long-term perspective (stable processes)
Red Organizations are highly opportunistic; they don’t generally
eye a prize beyond the next scheme in a few days or a few weeks. Amber
Organizations can take on long-term projects―constructing cathedrals
that might take two centuries to complete or creating networks of colo-
nial trading posts thousands of miles away to facilitate commerce.
This breakthrough is very much linked to the invention of
processes. With processes, we can replicate past experience into the
future. Last year’s harvest will be our template for this year’s; next year’s
classroom will be run with the same lesson plan as this year’s. With processes,
critical knowledge no longer depends on a particular person; it is
embedded in the organization and can be transmitted across generations.
Any person can be replaced by another that takes over the same role in the
process. Even the chief is replaceable, in an orderly succession, and
Amber Organizations can therefore survive for centuries.

Chapter 1.1 • Changing paradigms 21
At the individual level, people operating from a Conformist-
Amber paradigm strive for order and predictability; change is viewed
with suspicion. The same holds true for Amber Organizations, which are
exceptionally well-suited for stable contexts, where the future can be
planned based on past experience. They operate on the hidden
assumption that there is one right way of doing things and that the
world is (or should be) immutable. What has worked in the past will
work in the future. When the context is changing, and the way we do
things around here stops working, Amber Organizations find it hard to
accept the need for change. The idea that there is one right way makes
Amber Organizations ill at ease with competition. Historically, they
have striven for dominance and monopoly, and Amber Organizations
today still tend to view competition with suspicion.
Amber breakthrough 2: Size and stability (formal hierarchies)
In Red Organizations, power structures are in constant flux as
personalities jockey for influence. Conformist-Amber Organizations
bring stability to power, with formal titles, fixed hierarchies, and
organization charts. The overall structure settles into a rigid pyramid,
with a cascade of formal reporting lines from bosses to subordinates.
Below the pope there are cardinals; below cardinals, archbishops; below
archbishops, bishops; and below bishops, priests. The plant manager
commands the department heads, who in turn oversee unit managers,
line managers, foremen, and machine operators. The personal allegiance
of the foot soldier to the chief is no longer needed; the foot soldier has
integrated his place into the hierarchy. Even if the pope is weak, a priest
will not scheme to backstab him and take his place. Much larger
organizations become possible, spanning not hundreds but thousands of
workers, and they can operate across vast distances. Mankind’s first
global organizations―from the Catholic Church to the East India
Company―were built on a Conformist-Amber te