





EMERGENT STRATEGY
Shaping Change, Changing Worlds
by adrienne maree brown

DEDICATION
I dedicate this book to the memory of Grace Lee Boggs, who opened the door to
emergence and pushed me through, who taught me to keep listening and learning and
having conversations. She said, “Transform yourself to transform the world.”
I dedicate this book also to the memory of Charity Hicks, who saw all the interconnected
patterns as clear as day. She said, “Wage love.”

EPIGRAPH
“This may only be a dream of mine, but I think it can be made real.”
—Ella Baker

INTRODUCTION
First and foremost, thank you for opening this book. I hope you enjoy reading it as much as I have
enjoyed living, learning, and gathering it.
Wherever you are beginning this, take a deep breath and notice how you feel in your body, and how
the world around you feels.
Take a breath for the day you have had so far.
And a breath for this precious moment, which cannot be recreated.
Now, another for the day and night coming.
Here you are, in the cycle between the past and the future, choosing to spend your miraculous time
in the exploration of how humans, especially those seeking to grow liberation and justice, can learn
from the world around us how to best collaborate, how to shape change.
1
As I am gathering and writing this book, there is a trail of ants moving along the ceiling of my room,
and the sounds of a small jungle town coming in and out of the screened open windows, birds cawing,
laughter, children’s delight emerging from that, then tears. A car backfires and I flinch, a lizard peeks
at me from the door. It’s been raining for a few days and the air feels thick.
I feel good, I’ve been meditating, picking up my yoga practice, biking the two miles to the beach
when the sun comes out. Something is injured in my knee, but I am feeling alive against my limits.
I came to this edge of Mexico to pull a book together because, a few years ago, it was here, near
this tiny portion of the massive ocean, that I began to realize how important emergent strategy, strategy
for building complex patterns and systems of change through relatively small interactions, is to me—
the potential scale of transformation that could come from movements intentionally practicing this
adaptive, relational way of being, on our own and with others.
The waves drifting me towards and then away from the shore, seabirds of all kinds flocking over
the salty blue, pelicans dropping down and scooping schools of tiny fish into their big mouths. Diving
under the moving surface to see how everything humans leave in the water is repurposed as an
ecosystem. Laying in a hammock and watching mosquito mamas approach me, wait for my attention to
wander so they can feed on my blood.
I love the scene at the end of The Matrix where Neo sees everything in green-on-black code.
Emergent strategy is a way that all of us can begin to see the world in life-code—awakening us to the
sacred systems of life all around us. Many of us have been and are becoming students of these systems
of life, wondering if in fact we can unlock some crucial understanding about our own humanity if we
pay closer attention to this place we are from, the bodies we are in.
The world is full of beauty, magic, miracles, and patterns that induce wonder. This book is a
collection of essays, speeches, spells, interviews, conversations, tools, profiles, and poems sharing
my learning processes in the face of that wonder. You are basically holding a book of me saying,
“Wow, everything’s so amazing!” Or, “That’s not wow… Why not go with the wow option?”
Emergence is one of the best concepts I have learned for discussing this wow, this wonder.
“Emergence is the way complex systems and patterns arise out of a multiplicity of relatively simple
interactions.”
2

It is another way of speaking about the connective tissue of all that exists—the way, the Tao, the
force, change, God/dess, life. Birds flocking, cells splitting, fungi whispering underground.
Emergence emphasizes critical connections over critical mass, building authentic relationships,
listening with all the senses of the body and the mind.
With our human gift of reasoning, we have tried to control or overcome the emergent processes that
are our own nature, the processes of the planet we live on, and the universe we call home. The result
is crisis at each scale we are aware of, from our deepest inner moral sensibilities to the collective
scale of climate and planetary health and beyond, to our species in relation to space and time.
The crisis is everywhere, massive massive massive.
And we are small.
But emergence notices the way small actions and connections create complex systems, patterns that
become ecosystems and societies. Emergence is our inheritance as a part of this universe; it is how
we change. Emergent strategy is how we intentionally change in ways that grow our capacity to
embody the just and liberated worlds we long for.
A few words on what this book is and is not
I am offering this content as a cluster of thoughts in development, observations of existing patterns,
and questions of how we apply the brilliance of the world around us to our efforts to coexist in and
with this world as humans, particularly for those of us seeking to transform the crises of our time, to
turn our legacy towards harmony.
This book is for people who want to radically change the world.
3 
To apply natural order and our
love of life to the ways we create the next world. To tap into the most ancient systems and patterns for
wisdom as we build tomorrow.
This book is not one that will teach you all about hard science, as I am not a scientist. As Octavia
Butler said, “I would never have been a good scientist—my attention span was too short for that.”
My style is more “Ooh ah wow how??” than “Empirical data proves that…” I am writing this book
primarily for other people like myself, who crinkle our brows and lean away when someone starts
speaking math, who fall asleep almost immediately when attempting to read nonfiction, but who get
spun into wonder about the natural world and want to know things, who feel and know more than we
can say or explain, and want to know how knowing those things can transform the ways we approach
changing the world.
I’m sure there are science people who could write a contrarian book to anything in here.
4 
The
natural world actually supports any worldview—competitive, powerless, isolationist, violent.
For instance, humans so far have generally deified and aligned with the “king” of the jungle or
forest—lions, tigers, bears. And yet so many of these creatures, for all their isolated ferocity and
alpha power, are going extinct. While a major cause of that extinction is our human impact, there is
something to be said for adaptation, the adaptation of small, collaborative species. Roaches and ants
and deer and fungi and bacteria and viruses and bamboo and eucalyptus and squirrels and vultures
and mice and mosquitos and dandelions and so many other more collaborative life forms continue to
proliferate, survive, grow. Sustain.
I want to understand how we humans do that—how we earn a place on this precious planet, get in
the “right relationship” with it.
5 
So I am focusing on the ways creatures and ecosystems function
together in and with the natural world.

I am open to critiques of course, if they are offered in the spirit of collective liberation. Staying
focused on our foundational miraculous nature is actually very hard work in our modern culture of
deconstruction. We are socialized to see what is wrong, missing, off, to tear down the ideas of others
and uplift our own. To a certain degree, our entire future may depend on learning to listen, listen
without assumptions or defenses. So I am open to hearing what doesn’t work about this book, as long
as you promise to stay open to what does work.
We all learn differently, and this book favors those who learn like me, through inspiration, through
late-night conversations, personal revelations, experience, and reflection. I hope it will inspire and
engage your interest in complex sciences, and in being of a miraculous world.
“Exercise your human mind as fully as possible, knowing it is only an exercise. Build beautiful artifacts, solve
problems, explore the secrets of the physical universe, savor the input from all the senses, feel the joy and sorrow,
the laughter, the empathy, compassion and tote the emotional memory in your travel bag.”
—Ryan Power, Waking Life
This is not a book to displace all the strategic processes in play in social justice movements, or to
discount the work that has happened up until now—there have been effective movements towards
justice and liberation throughout the history of human existence—I am thrilled by how humans have
continuously stood up against our own weaknesses. I think throughout history we have done our best
given what we knew, and we will continue to do so. I also know that there are so many brilliant
strategists out there who turn data into action and policy, and I respect that work. I see this offering as
a noticing that can shape our next steps, as more water joining the river. And as a way to get aware of
what we have learned so far, so that we can move forward from there, instead of repeating lessons
we have already learned.
While my default position is wonder, I am not without critique, disappointment, frustration, and
even depression when I contemplate humanity. Especially our social justice movements, where my
expectations are (foolishly) higher. I promise to be honest about the ways that those aspects of
personal movement crisis show up in my longing and searching for other ways of being.
Octavia Butler, one of the cornerstones of my awareness of emergent strategy, spoke of the fatal
human flaw as a combination of hierarchy and intelligence.
6 
We are brilliant at survival, but brutal at
it. We tend to slip out of togetherness the way we slip out of the womb, bloody and messy and
surprised to be alone. And clever—able to learn with our whole bodies the ways of this world.
My hope is that this content will deepen and soften that intelligence such that we can align our
behavior, our structures and our movements with our visions of justice and liberation, and give those
of us co-creating the future more options for working with each other and embodying the things we
fight for—dignity, collective power, love, generative conflict, and community.
I will be satisfied if this book sparks conversations, new practices, and projects where people keep
noticing, observing, and learning about emergence and liberation. If people see their experimental
work affirmed by this content. And if I hear of people’s self and collective transformation journeys
related to emergent strategy, whether people use that exact terminology or not. I hope it is part of our
(r)evolutionary journey.
I hope that this book is clear enough that people feel free to play with all of these observations and
their own, add to it, discard what doesn’t serve, and keep innovating. I don’t want to be the owner of
this, just a joyful conduit.
Throughout the book I weave together thoughts and theories I have learned in the past decades of

study and obsession with original content, tools, spells, poems, examples, lists, assessments—
everything I can think of that could be helpful for those interested in this work.
As I was finishing the book it felt like it was missing something. I realized that it was because the
way I have learned about emergent strategy is in conversation with others, so I asked a bunch of
people I consider to be teachers in my life to get in conversation with me. And as their words poured
in, in poems and quotes and stories and testimonials, all of a sudden the book became really alive and
exciting to me. It also grew to nearly five-hundred pages. I slowed down and started weaving and
listening. Now you get to hear from a variety of people who are doing emergent strategy work—in
their own words, in hybrid interview/conversations, in love stories and moments of wow. Some of
this content is in these pages, and some of it is on the Emergent Strategy Ideation Institute site.
7
The book can be engaged nonlinearly! There is an assessment section, you can start there and let that
determine where you dive in. You can just go straight to the tools at the end and start facilitating and
experimenting with them. Or you can start with a review of the principles and elements of emergent
strategy, which are in conversation with each other and can stand alone or cluster.
You can read the book with others, assess each other and assess the groups and circles you move in.
Come up with new words and new observations for all of this, notice how it connects and echoes
other theoretical frameworks. Underline everything that moves you and then give it to someone
younger than you. Come up with workshops and retreats around this work. Take it, run, go, grow,
innovate, emerge.
You can also just like the idea of this book. I often like an idea that I don’t have time or attention to
fully engage. I won’t be mad! I believe we are all actually already aware of these things, we just have
the volume turned down. May this serve as a turn up of our awareness of our place in the miraculous.
There are a million paths into the future, and many of them can be transformative for the whole.
The Beginning of My Obsession
We have lived through a good half century of individualistic linear organizing (led by charismatic
individuals or budget-building institutions), which intends to reform or revolutionize society, but falls
back into modeling the oppressive tendencies against which we claim to be pushing. Some of those
tendencies are seeking to assert one right way or one right strategy. Many align with the capitalistic
belief that constant growth and critical mass is the only way to create change, even if they don’t use
that language.
There are new strategies emerging, or being remembered—many would describe this as a shift from
a masculine to feminine (or patriarchal to feminist) leadership. I see that, and I think it is also about
something beyond all of our binaries—evolving in relationship with our hierarchical tendency.
At this point in my life, I am not against hierarchy. I notice hierarchies in my life and attention all the
time, inside my own preferences for whom I spend my waking hours with and how I like to spend my
time. I also deeply value experience and natural affinity for things—I am oriented towards healing
and not math, so I don’t offer myself up to create budgets for people. I follow other people’s
leadership around math, I offer leadership around healing, which comes more naturally to me. That
give and take creates room for micro-hierarchies in a collaborative environment.
One of my favorite questions today is: How do we turn our collective full-bodied intelligence
towards collaboration, if that is the way we will survive?
My favorite life forms right now are dandelions and mushrooms—the resilience in these structures,

which we think of as weeds and fungi, the incomprehensible scale, the clarity of identity, excites me. I
love to see the way mushrooms can take substances we think of as toxic, and process them as food, or
that dandelions spread not only themselves but their community structure, manifesting their essential
qualities (which include healing and detoxifying the human body) to proliferate and thrive in a new
environment. The resilience of these life forms is that they evolve while maintaining core practices
that ensure their survival.
A mushroom is a toxin-transformer, a dandelion is a community of healers waiting to spread… What
are we as humans, what is our function in the universe?
One thing I have observed: When we are engaged in acts of love, we humans are at our best and
most resilient. The love in romance that makes us want to be better people, the love of children that
makes us change our whole lives to meet their needs, the love of family that makes us drop everything
to take care of them, the love of community that makes us work tirelessly with broken hearts.
Perhaps humans’ core function is love. Love leads us to observe in a much deeper way than any
other emotion. I think of how delightful it is to see something new in my lovers’ faces, something they
may only know from inside as a feeling.
If love were the central practice of a new generation of organizers and spiritual leaders, it would
have a massive impact on what was considered organizing. If the goal was to increase the love, rather
than winning or dominating a constant opponent, I think we could actually imagine liberation from
constant oppression. We would suddenly be seeing everything we do, everyone we meet, not through
the tactical eyes of war, but through eyes of love. We would see that there’s no such thing as a blank
canvas, an empty land or a new idea—but everywhere there is complex, ancient, fertile ground full of
potential.
We would organize with the perspective that there is wisdom and experience and amazing story in
the communities we love, and instead of starting up new ideas/organizations all the time, we would
want to listen, support, collaborate, merge, and grow through fusion, not competition.
We would understand that the strength of our movement is in the strength of our relationships, which
could only be measured by their depth. Scaling up would mean going deeper, being more vulnerable
and more empathetic.
What does depth require from us, from me? In my longing for depth I have been re-rooting in the
earth, in myself and my creativity, in my community, in my spiritual practices, honing in on work that
is not only meaningful but feels joyful, listening with less and less judgment to the ideas and efforts of
others, having visions that are long term.
Another part of walking this path has been the practice of humility—enough humility to learn, to be
taught, to have teachers. As a military brat, I’ve always rebelled against anyone I perceived as an
authority. It’s been hard and rewarding work to relinquish some of that resistance in order to let
wisdom in.
The Sufi poet Hafiz said, “How do I listen to others? As if everyone were my Teacher, speaking to
me (Her) cherished last words.”
8
I am listening now with all of my senses, as if the whole universe might exist just to teach me more
about love. I listen to strangers, I listen to random invitations, I listen to criticisms, I listen to my
body, I listen to my creativity and to the artists who inspire me, I listen to elders, I listen to my dreams
and the books I am reading. I notice that the more I pay attention, the more I see order, clear messages,
patterns, and invitations in the small or seemingly random things that happen in my life.

In all these ways, I meditate on love.
This practice lets me connect to the part of myself that is divine, aligned with the universe, and the
place within myself where I can be a conduit for spiritual truth—I don’t know what else to call it.
What comes forth, as lessons and realizations and beliefs—doesn’t feel political, or even about
organizing. It feels like spirit leading me to the truth.
Things like:
The less I engage in gossip, the less I harbor suspicion, the more space I find within myself
for miraculous experiences.
When I fear the universe, I fear myself. When I love and am in awe of the universe, I love and
am in awe of myself.
9 
Imagine then, the power when I align with the universe.
Nothing is required of me more than being, and creating. Simultaneously being present with
who I am, who we are as a species…and creating who we must become, and within that who
I must become.
When these truths come to me, it reminds me of how so many past leaders have humbled
themselves, or been forced—through prison sentences, exile, or other punitive measures—to live
simple lives, spending time in prayer and meditation and reflection. It reminds me that they all seem
to have this solid core of truth within themselves that cannot be shaken by external pressures. Those
truths resonate with me when I read or hear about them, even without the context of their whole
spiritual journey. But I know that to truly understand, to truly be able to transform myself and develop
that own unflappable core, I cannot vicariously live their spiritual lessons: I must walk my own path.
Our generation must walk the spiritual path that is available to us only in this time, with its own
unique combination of wisdom and creation.
I think there are many ways to find that simple path within ourselves, and I think that those of us who
wish to see a truly, radically different world must demand of ourselves the possibility that we are
called to lead not from right to left, or from minority to majority, but from spirit towards liberation.
So I suppose it is time to come out as a spiritual leader, in my own way.
Which means—everyone is my teacher.
“You weren’t starving before you got here. You were born full.”
—Chani Nicholas
To write this book, I have had to get intimate with what I don’t know, with my fears and doubts,
with my restlessness. I was very young the first time I felt this restlessness, this sense that how things
are isn’t right, isn’t enough, is empty even. Even as a child this sense made me nauseous, like dancing
around a black hole, praying it is a portal and not a nothingness. As I get older, I understand that it is
the unknown, and it is where the most exciting parts of life happen.
This is my leap into the unknown.
What is Emergent Strategy?
“Emergence is the way complex systems and patterns arise out of a multiplicity of relatively simple
interactions”—I will repeat these words from Nick Obolenksy throughout this book because they are
the clearest articulation of emergence that I have come across. In the framework of emergence, the

whole is a mirror of the parts. Existence is fractal—the health of the cell is the health of the species
and the planet.
There are examples of emergence everywhere.
Birds don’t make a plan to migrate, raising resources to fund their way, packing for scarce times,
mapping out their pit stops. They feel a call in their bodies that they must go, and they follow it,
responding to each other, each bringing their adaptations.
There is an art to flocking: staying separate enough not to crowd each other, aligned enough to
maintain a shared direction, and cohesive enough to always move towards each other. (Responding to
destiny together.) Destiny is a calling that creates a beautiful journey.
Emergence is beyond what the sum of its parts could even imagine.
A group of caterpillars or nymphs might not see flight in their future, but it’s inevitable.
It’s destiny.
Oak trees don’t set an intention to listen to each other better, or agree to hold tight to each other
when the next storm comes. Under the earth, always, they reach for each other, they grow such that
their roots are intertwined and create a system of strength that is as resilient on a sunny day as it is in
a hurricane.
Dandelions don’t know whether they are a weed or a brilliance. But each seed can create a field of
dandelions. We are invited to be that prolific. And to return fertility to the soil around us.
Cells may not know civilization is possible. They don’t amass as many units as they can sign up to
be the same. No—they grow until they split, complexify. Then they interact and intersect and discover
their purpose—I am a lung cell! I am a tongue cell!—and they serve it. And they die. And what
emerges from these cycles are complex organisms, systems, movements, societies.
Nothing is wasted, or a failure. Emergence is a system that makes use of everything in the iterative
process. It’s all data.
Octavia Butler (amb)
All successful life is (Fractal)
Adaptable, (Adaptive)
Opportunistic, (Nonlinear/Iterative)
Tenacious, (Resilient/Transformative Justice)
Interconnected, and (Interdependent/Decentralized)
Fecund. (Creates More Possibilities)
Understand this. (Scholarship, Reflection)
Use it. (Practice/Experiment)
Shape God. (Intention)
Octavia Butler said, “civilization is to groups what intelligence is to individuals. It is a means of
combining the intelligence of many to achieve ongoing group adaptation.”
10
She also said “all that you touch you change / all that you change, changes you.”
11 
We are constantly
impacting and changing our civilization—each other, ourselves, intimates, strangers. And we are
working to transform a world that is, by its very nature, in a constant state of change.
Janine Benyus, a student of biomimicry, says “Nature/Life would always create conditions
conducive to life.”
12 
She tells of a radical fringe of scientists who are realizing that natural selection
isn’t individual, but mutual—that species only survive if they learn to be in community.

How can we, future ancestors, align ourselves with the most resilient practices of emergence as a
species?
Many of us have been socialized to understand that constant growth, violent competition, and
critical mass are the ways to create change. But emergence shows us that adaptation and evolution
depend more upon critical, deep, and authentic connections, a thread that can be tugged for support
and resilience. The quality of connection between the nodes in the patterns.
Dare I say love.
And we know how to connect—we long for it.
Together we must move like waves. Have you observed the ocean? The waves are not the same
over and over—each one is unique and responsive. The goal is not to repeat each other’s motion, but
to respond in whatever way feels right in your body. The waves we create are both continuous and a
one-time occurrence. We must notice what it takes to respond well. How it feels to be in a body, in a
whole—separate, aligned, cohesive. Critically connected.
I would call our work to change the world “science fictional behavior”—being concerned with the
way our actions and beliefs now, today, will shape the future, tomorrow, the next generations.
We are excited by what we can create, we believe it is possible to create the next world.
We believe.
For me this might be because I was born to a trekkie—meaning one who watches Star Trek.
Obsessively.
My dad watched Star Trek in a way that seems logical to me now. He watched this “post-racist”
narrative as Black man from the deep south bringing multiracial children into a racist world—eyes
wide, faith bubbling up.
We all watched it together, as his military career took our family from place to place. My parents
intentionally took us away from the United States for our early years and I think they believed that by
the time we came back here things would have changed on the race front.
That didn’t happen, and the time came to return to the US—my father was stationed in Georgia. I
think what I experienced there, the casual and constant presence of white supremacy, the knee-jerk
assessments of my intelligence and humanity, is one of the foundational catalysts for my study of sci fi,
apocalypse and post-apocalypse, emergence and complexity.
I thought then, and I think now: This can’t be all. No one survives this way, not long term. This can’t
be the purpose of our species, to constantly identify each other as “other,” build walls between us,
and engage in both formal and informal wars against each other’s bodies.
I felt, and feel, miraculous. It’s confusing to feel so miraculous when so many people hate my skin
and my history.
I see the miraculous in others—even those who hate me have heartbeats, and, I generally assume,
have people they love. Why can’t they love me? Should I love them anyway? How can I hold these
massive contradictions?
I started reading sci fi obsessively, looking for options, for other worlds where I wasn’t dismissed
as an idealist or an inferior.
On that path I discovered Octavia Butler. Decades before my birth, she was working these same
edges in her heart, pendulum swinging between curiosity, possibility, and hopelessness. Because if
we can’t articulate more viable futures, and adapt, our human future is pretty hopeless.

Octavia wrote novels with young Black women protagonists meeting aliens, surviving apocalypse,
evolving into vampires, becoming telepathic networks, time traveling to reckon with slave-owning
ancestors. Woven throughout her work are two things: 1) a coherent visionary exploration of humanity
and 2) emergent strategies for being better humans.
A visionary exploration of humanity includes imagination. Octavia spent her life working through
complex ideas of the future on behalf of humans.
As long as we operate in time the way we currently do—remembering the past, observing and
acting in the present, imagining the future—there will be divergent paths that are moving in and out of
alignment, in and out of conflict. Imagination is shaped by our entire life experience, our
socialization, the concepts we are exposed to, where we fall in the global hierarchies of society.
Our ideas of right and wrong shift with time—right now it’s clear to me that something is wrong if it
hurts this planet. But if we don’t claim the future, that sense of loyalty to earth, of environmentalism,
could become outdated. Kenny Bailey
13 
helped me understand this—that justice, rights, things we take
for granted, are not permanent. Once there were kings and queens all over the earth. Someday we
might speak of presidents and CEOs in past tense only.
It is so important that we fight for the future, get into the game, get dirty, get experimental. How do
we create and proliferate a compelling vision of economies and ecologies that center humans and the
natural world over the accumulation of material?
We embody. We learn. We release the idea of failure, because it’s all data.
But first we imagine.
We are in an imagination battle.
14
Trayvon Martin and Mike Brown and Renisha McBride and so many others are dead because, in
some white imagination, they were dangerous. And that imagination is so respected that those who
kill, based on an imagined, racialized fear of Black people, are rarely held accountable.
Imagination has people thinking they can go from being poor to a millionaire as part of a shared
American dream. Imagination turns Brown bombers into terrorists and white bombers into mentally
ill victims. Imagination gives us borders, gives us superiority, gives us race as an indicator of
capability. I often feel I am trapped inside someone else’s imagination, and I must engage my own
imagination in order to break free.
All of this imagining, in the poverty of our current system, is heightened because of scarcity
economics. There isn’t enough, so we need to hoard, enclose, divide, fence up, and prioritize
resources and people.
We have to imagine beyond those fears. We have to ideate—imagine and conceive—together.
We must imagine new worlds that transition ideologies and norms, so that no one sees Black people
as murderers, or Brown people as terrorists and aliens, but all of us as potential cultural and
economic innovators. This is a time-travel exercise for the heart. This is collaborative ideation—
what are the ideas that will liberate all of us?
The more people that collaborate on that ideation, the more that people will be served by the
resulting world(s).
Science fiction is simply a way to practice the future together. I suspect that is what many of you are
up to, practicing futures together, practicing justice together, living into new stories. It is our right and
responsibility to create a new world.
What we pay attention to grows, so I’m thinking about how we grow what we are all imagining and

creating into something large enough and solid enough that it becomes a tipping point.
Ursula Le Guin recently said, “It’s up to authors to spark the imagination of their readers and to help
them envision alternatives to how we live.”
15
I agree with her. As Toni Cade Bambara has taught us, we must make just and liberated futures
irresistible.
16 
We are all the protagonists of what might be called the great turning, the change, the new
economy, the new world.
And I think it is healing behavior, to look at something so broken and see the possibility and
wholeness in it. That’s how I work as a healer: when a body is between my hands, I let wholeness
pour through. We are all healers too—we are creating possibilities, because we are seeing a future
full of wholeness.
I suspect this is, in part, because we are practicing emergent strategies.
My mentor Grace Lee Boggs first raised the concept of emergence with us in Detroit after reading
Margaret Wheatley’s work about biomimicry and mycelium magic.
17 
Grace started asking us what our
movements would look like if we focused on critical connections instead of critical mass.
We need each other. I love the idea of shifting from “mile wide inch deep” movements to “inch
wide mile deep” movements that schism the existing paradigm.
18
Now, I’ve said what emergence is. Strategy is a military term simply meaning a plan of action
towards a goal.
19
In our movements for social change (and in every other space I’ve ever been in), we generally use
the word “strategy” in a positive sense. We say, “oh wow s/he’s so strategic!,” and we mean that this
person is smart, calculating, practical—a winner! But the word is actually not that discerning.
Horrible, racist, sexist, ableist, patriarchal, outdated, inflexible plans can be pitched as strategic.
We must be more precise.
Emergent strategies are ways for humans to practice complexity and grow the future through
relatively simple interactions. This juxtaposition of emergence and strategy was what made the most
sense to me when I was trying to explain the kind of leadership I see in Octavia’s books.
It isn’t just that her protagonists are Black, female, or young leaders… Or maybe it is because of all
of those things: who leads matters. But what I noticed is that her leaders are adaptive—riding change
like dolphins ride the ocean. Adaptive but also intentional, like migrating birds who know how to get
where they’re going even when a storm pushes them a hundred miles off course.
Humans? Some of us are surviving, following, flocking—but some of us are trying to imagine where
we are going as we fly. That is radical imagination.
Octavia’s protagonists were also interdependent, often polyamorous. I suspect that Octavia
understood from her own feelings of loneliness, desire, and pleasure that the personal is political, and
that pleasure evokes change—perhaps more than shame. More precisely, where shame makes us
freeze and try to get really small and invisible, pleasure invites us to move, to open, to grow.
At this point, we have all of the information we need to create a change; it isn’t a matter of facts. It’s
a matter of longing, having the will to imagine and implement something else. We are living in the
ancestral imagination of others, with their longing for safety and abundance, a longing that didn’t
include us, or included us as enemy, fright, other.
Octavia played with what emerged from a Black woman or girl—what longings, what pleasure,
what communities and connections, what philosophies and divinities. The strategies that played out in
Octavia’s books included adaptability and interdependence—often through the practice of repeated

vulnerability.
Right now there is an organization called Black Organizing for Leadership and Dignity (BOLD),
which is cultivating a safe space for Black leaders to practice being vulnerable, being in mutual
support, with a goal of countering the usual model of leader isolation.
20 
We all need a place where we
can weep and be held and feel our feelings and figure out how those feelings can direct our next
evolution.
I am now part of the training team for BOLD, and I can honestly say that after a period of movement
heartbreak and disillusionment, the focus on love and relationship at BOLD is what brought me back
to justified and tangible hope, opening up inside me the generosity of time and gifts that is necessary
for movements to grow. I wanted to be a part of movement again because it was a pleasure to be in
the Black spaces that BOLD was creating.
What amazes me is that, in the space of such constant Black trauma, we get together and celebrate
and love on each other, we laugh, we find the pleasure of community, of interdependence. It feels
good together.
Octavia’s leaders were also decentralized, and they were generative—resilience and solutions
came from that decentralization; the collective response was possible because no one person held the
power.
Ferguson, Baltimore, Minneapolis, Chicago show us the power of individuals willing to act without
a single leader, and their leaderfull examples are inspiring others to stand up in real time, offline and
online, to change legislation and perception.
Octavia was concerned with scale—understanding that what happens at the interpersonal level is a
way to understand the whole of society. In many of her books, she shows us how radical ideas spread
through conversation, questions, one to one interactions. Social movements right now are also fractal,
practicing at a small scale what we most want to see at the universal level. No more growth or
scaling up before actually learning through experience.
Rather than narrowing into one path forward, Octavia’s leaders were creating more and more
possibilities. Not one perfect path forward, but an abundance of futures, of ways to manage resources
together, to be brilliant together.
In trying to place Octavia into a context that non-sci fi people could understand, I kept finding
resonance in emergence and complex sciences, the ideas that Grace had brought onto my radar. I
started to pay more attention to the magic of the world, the small collective creatures who were
humble and abundant and resilient.
And now I have become obsessed with how we can be movements like flocks of birds, underground
power like whispering mushrooms, the seashell representation of a galactic vision for justice—small
patterns that avoid useless predation, spread lessons, and proliferate change.
Emergent strategies let us practice, in every possible way, the world we want to see.
So, ok, but what EXACTLY is emergent strategy?
Emergent Strategy:
was, initially, a way of describing the adaptive and relational leadership model found in the
work of Black science fiction writer Octavia Butler (and others).
then it grew into plans of action, personal practices and collective organizing tools that

account for constant change and rely on the strength of relationship for adaptation. With a
crush on biomimicry and permaculture.
Biomimetics or biomimicry is the imitation of the models, systems, and elements of nature
for the purpose of solving complex human problems.
Permaculture is a system of agricultural and social design principles centered around
simulating or directly utilizing the patterns and features observed in natural ecosystems.
which evolved into strategies for organizers building movements for justice and liberation
that leverage relatively simple interactions to create complex patterns, systems, and
transformations—including adaptation, interdependence and decentralization, fractal
awareness, resilience and transformative justice, nonlinear and iterative change, creating
more possibilities.
and now it’s like…ways for humans to practice being in right relationship to our home and
each other, to practice complexity, and grow a compelling future together through relatively
simple interactions. Emergent strategy is how we intentionally change in ways that grow our
capacity to embody the just and liberated worlds we long for.
and maybe, if I’m honest, it’s a philosophy for how to be in harmony and love, in and with the
world.
a complex movement
over and over again
it becomes known
the peace we seek
is seeking us
the joy a full bud
awaiting our attention
justice in our hands
longing to be practiced
the whole world
learning
from within
this thrilling mote in the universe
laboratory
labyrinth
internalize demands
you are the one
you are waiting for
externalize love
bind us together into
a greater self
a complex movement
a generative abundance
an embodied evolution

learn to be here
critique is a seductress
her door is always open
so what if you get some
we are going further
past reform, to wonder
this requires comprehension
that cannot fit in words
out beyond our children
beyond the end of time
there is a ceaseless cycle
a fractal of sublime
and we come to create it
to soil our hands and faces
loving loving and loving
ourselves, and all our places
Lineage of Emergent Strategy
Lineage is both important for me to name, and impossible to track. I’ve come across these concepts in
so many ways and places, primarily in the natural world, in my own body, in the development of my
nibblings,
21 
in movements (including the Movement for Black Lives and Occupy), in stories of how
my paternal grandmother survived and created life in Pendleton, South Carolina, in stories of how my
ancestors survived slavery.
Every time I have worked with Indigenous communities that have been able to sustain their cultural
practices through the onslaught of colonialism and imperialism, as I listen, I hear emergent strategy—
being in right relationship with the natural world, learning from the ways change and resilience
happen throughout this entire interconnected complex system. Some Indigenous and First Nations
friends and teachers have patiently listened to my “discoveries” around being humble in the face of
the unknown, listening closely to all that is within and beyond our human ways of knowing. Honoring
the changes that come through longing, honoring the very small things that create the largest shifts in
the world.
I am the first child of two people who created a large shift for themselves from small actions,
actions of love, weighted with the context of their time—a Black man and white woman finding
lifelong, life-changing commitment in the context of white supremacy and racism, external and
internal. And it was quick—a noticing each other, a flirting without words, talking, laughing, and, four
months later, eloping. I showed up a year and a half later. Love overcame racist socialization,
creating more possibilities between two people who had been taught the other was dangerous.
After family, there is a certain convergence of thinkers and conversations that has sharpened this
particular set of concepts into something I could name and share. Most of this particular lineage
happened on worn down couches and over kitchen tables in Detroit from 2008 to 2014.
In 1992, Margaret Wheatley published a book called Leadership and the New Science, based on
her work with organizations and leaders on what is effective, through a lens of quantum physics,
biology, and chaos theory. Her key learnings were that:

everything is about relationships, critical connections;
chaos is an essential process that we need to engage;
the sharing of information is fundamental for organizational success; and
vision is an invisible field that binds us together, emerging from relationships and chaos and
information.
Wheatley has continued developing her thinking on how transformation happens, how communities
learn and evolve. She has published a series of books, in which she explores and shares her learning
—including how we listen to each other, and what communities around the world are doing to
generate life, to generate cooperation and future together. When we met and worked together on a
gathering of organizers in Detroit, I got the sense that she’s a little over Leadership, so I encourage
you to read it for the references—it is a foundational text—and then read everything else she is
working on.
Grace Lee Boggs, Detroit-based American revolutionary, my late mentor and friend, read
Leadership and began to incorporate some of the ideas into speeches and her own writing in the last
decade of her one-hundred year, one-hundred day life. As a thinker, I would say Grace was a
voracious, efficient beast, and philosophy was her hunting ground. She stayed curious and relevant
until the end, asking metaphysical questions on her deathbed. And she was usually ahead of her time
—she was creating visionary fiction with Bunyan Bryant in the 1970s.
22
During the years of our mentorship and friendship, Grace would sit in her armchair and encourage
everyone who came through her doors to develop as an organic intellectual who could take these
concepts into daily life and community work. Grace taught me dialectical humanism—the cycle of
collective transformation of beliefs that occurs as we gather new information and experiences,
meaning that, over time, we can understand and hold a position we previously believed to be wrong.
23
In Grace’s work, that cycle of transformation was foundational, something to cultivate in young
people, in communities. In addition, she resonated with Wheatley’s idea that critical connections are
more important in a long-term transformation process than critical mass.
Relationships are everything.
Invincible/ill Weaver, a Detroit-based artist-organizer, heard about the book and concepts from
Grace, and became a student of emergence, naming their music and media work after the concept and
generating an award-winning multi-media interactive album/project called Complex Movements
24
around these and other concepts at the intersection of complex science and social justice.
I was reading Black, science fiction writer Octavia Butler’s work over and over during that time. I
was also visiting and eventually moving to Detroit, in large part due to my relationship with ill. As
I’ve mentioned, I was looking for language and frameworks to use when exploring the kind of
leadership Butler’s protagonists practiced, and found them in conversations with ill and Grace about
emergence—interdependence, iteration, being in relationship with constantly changing conditions,
fractals.
Emergence, particularly as it applies to change, was a thrilling match.
ill and I now have a work soulmateship—they are family, a chosen sibling, an idea confidante.
Detroit’s movement and arts scenes are actually a complex network of such familial relationships,
cultivated through sharing resources, loving the city, and conversing as we learn together. I am a

nomad who also feels rooted here because of this network.
Wheatley’s work speaks of relationship—the depth of relationship between the individuals in a
system determines the strength of the system. Butler, Wheatley, ill, Grace, myself, and many others
have been growing a strong system of relationships for considering emergence as a game-changing
approach to movement work.
Ok, But Who Are You?
Right. I’m adrienne maree brown. I am an auntie, sister, daughter, woe,
25 
writer, facilitator, coach,
mentor, mediator, pleasure activist, sci-fi scholar, doula, healer, tarot reader, witch, cheerleader,
singer, philosopher, queer Black multiracial lover of life living in Detroit.
For this book, I am drawing most heavily on my facilitation, mediation, and coaching experiences—
I have been facilitating social justice movement work formally since 2001, and before that, in high
school and college, I did student organizing in which I often found myself in what I later came to
understand as the facilitation role. Inside of that work I have been asked to mediate everything from
organizational beef to break-ups, and have coached people through personal and professional
transformation along the way.
I have supported environmental, food, reproductive, gender, economic, and other justice work over
the years. At times, I worked formally in organizations that do harm reduction work with active drug
users and sex workers, voter organizing at the national level, food justice work in Detroit, and
nonviolent direct-action training, primarily supporting Indigenous peoples and other communities
directly impacted by climate crisis. I also supported the second US Social Forum as a facilitator. I’ve
held a variety of titles from assistant to coordinator to executive director.
In each movement location I felt inspired by how people can come together for something greater
than ourselves, and I felt a yearning for more.
Throughout this path of my jobs, I was always facilitating, within and beyond the organizations I
served. At its most fundamental, facilitation is the art of making things easy, making it easier for
humans to work together and get things done.
“There is a difference between ‘simple’ and ‘easy.’ Simple as in the ‘relatively simple interactions’ of emergence,
easy as in ‘facilitation is the art of making things easy.’ I don’t think they are the same, and I have a hunch the
difference might be important and that maybe it should be explicit. Simple means that it boils down to relationships
between individual people, objects, beings, truths. Ease has more to do with the amount of friction (or
understanding) between the peopleobjectsbeingstruths. And part of what can clear a path to making things easier
is to name the simple interactions at play in a complex system.”
—Rachel Plattus
I think facilitation is rooted in a certain grand love for life. I’ve recently realized that I come from a
family of facilitators, though everyone wouldn’t describe themselves that way.
As I mentioned, my parents are an interracial couple who fell in love in the deep South in the mid-
seventies. I am sure I will write their love story one day, but for the purpose of this book it’s mostly
important to know that both of them had to be able to see something impossible (based on the families
and society they’d been born into) as not only a possible way forward, but as the best way forward.
In their family, work, and community roles over the years, both my parents have shown a natural
capacity for leading groups, organizing tasks, making things easier for those around them. They have
navigated a wide range of political and economic difference in our extended family.

I have two sisters, both of whom I look to as teachers and confidantes. We are each very different,
and yet we all seem to be oriented towards facilitation, consensus, and mediation work.
In our lifetimes, being multiracial has become more common, but navigating other peoples’
regressive, fearful, or exoticizing ideas about our identities is one of the ways each member of my
immediate family grew this skill set of being able to see what’s between, what connects the things that
seem separate, the ever-present whole.
I also have to speak here of my evangelical maternal grandfather, Fred Mathis, who facilitated many
conversations about Jesus, morality, spirit, faith, and love in his lifetime. Every single time I was in
his presence, I was amazed at how quickly we were in a conversation of his choosing, where he was
really listening to my child-thoughts about god and love and duty, where I felt I could be honest, even
with my doubts, even with my heart. We often differed in opinion, which, with him, felt safe and even
invited in a way that it wasn’t and hasn’t been with most other southern white people. We would talk,
and then he would get me on a horse and take me to the woods, asking me intermittently if I
understood how powerful the horse was, how beautiful the land was. Though he was not a fan of my
queer sexuality—the only letter I have from him includes scripture and sadness in response to my
somewhat impetuous (but accurate) assertion that “I like to sleep with everybody!”—he let me come
back to his table and before he left this plane we created room to recognize each other’s humanity and
spirituality. I came to understand his fears were rooted in love for me and concern for my eternal
soul. He came to understand I was going to find my own way, and that I loved him and was living a
life he couldn’t imagine. I learned from him the art of conversation, faith, and silence.
My paternal grandmother, Elouise Brown, died when I was nine. One of my clearest secret
memories is that I saw her, impossibly, on a playground, shortly before I learned of her death. As I get
older, I think part of her came to me to be carried for a while; I have felt her with me so closely. Most
of her lessons have been passed down to me through stories about her, patched together with sparse
deep memories of her hands in my hair: her door was always open, there was something to eat, the
neighborhood kids knew they could come open her deep freezer for a popsicle. She had seven
children of her own. From her I learned that food is an important foundation for community, and that
love isn’t always a doorway to forever…sometimes it is a door to another love. Always it is an
emergent process.
Among other things, love is an energy of possibility: the possibility of wholeness, in a Platonic
understanding. I come from a lineage of brave and radical love, and I don’t think it is an accident that
love has been such an overt and active force in my life and that I have come to the conclusion that
there is a science of love, a science of transformation and acceptance and gratitude that can help us to
be better humans. So I will draw on that love experience as data as much as any other data presented
in this book.
Below are some of the other aspects of who I am in this lineage, and what shapes the content
gathered here.
Pleasure Activist
I picked up this term from harm reductionist
26 
Keith Cylar, who I met only briefly before he passed
on April 5, 2004 after twenty years of living with HIV. Initially pleasure activism was about claiming
our right to experience pleasure, to be safe and respected in the pleasures we choose.
It has expanded for me over the years as I have come to believe that facts, guilt, and shame are

limited motivations for creating change, even though those are the primary forces we use in our
organizing work. I suspect that to really transform our society, we will need to make justice one of the
most pleasurable experiences we can have.
27
We also have to stop demonizing pleasure. We try to leverage control over the natural world by
making our emotions and sensations less reliable than our thoughts, and then burn at the stake anyone
who stays attuned to the ways and power of pleasure in the natural world. It’s counter productive.
Audre Lorde’s essay The Uses of the Erotic is foundational writing on the radical act of tuning into
pleasure and not settling for less than the erotic sense of wholeness and rightness in one’s life. She is
my ancestor in the lineage of this particular work and many others.
I will speak many times of BOLD, the leadership development for Black organizers that is one of
my favorite political homes. What we do there is turn and face reality, engage in deep relationship,
and love up on each other. It is an organizing space that is also a maroon space, and it is always a
pleasure to enter.
28 
Every member of BOLD is a teacher of mine.
What we pay attention to grows—this is a hard world, but it is also a world full of love and
pleasure. I am of that, attending to and growing that. That, to me, is pleasure activism. I am pretty
certain that the next book I write will be on pleasure activism.
Healer/Doula
We all have the capacity to heal each other—healer is a possibility in each of us.
In my experience, healing happens when a place of trauma or pain is given full attention, really
listened to. Healing is the resilience instinct of our bodies, a skill we unlearn as we are taught to pay
for and rely on data and medicine outside of our own awareness to be well. I have been discovering,
or surrendering, to my gifts as a healer. There is a way I can open up my presence, voice, and touch to
an energy greater than what my body or life has given me. Then truth, comfort, ease, release, and other
healing experiences can flow through, wholeness and acceptance of what is can be felt. I have studied
reiki, massage, somatic bodywork, voice healing, tarot, and witchcraft as I have felt my healer
capacity emerge.
I place doula here because the work feels the same—a doula, or birth supporter, is specifically a
person who supports a pregnant person before, during, and after childbirth. The role was traditionally
held by women in the family or community, often working with a midwife or doctor in the process.
Childbirth these days is one of the clearest examples of humans working against nature—hence the
norms of sterile medicated hospital births with a drastic increase in scheduled inductions and
unnecessary C-sections.
I learned of these trends away from natural birth when my sister Autumn started having her babies,
and she taught me a ton with her choices. I had been asked several times to be a doula and kept saying
no, because BLOOD! and the proximity of the words “vagina” and “tear” didn’t feel like it was going
to work for me.
Then a woman was attacked with a hammer behind my apartment while I was living in Oakland and
I was the first to find her and comfort her as she bled and struggled to stay conscious. I saw her
strength and aliveness and held it with her until the ambulance came. When she came to thank me a
week later we spoke of how we had created a future for her together.
After that experience, and inspired by Autumn, I said yes the next time I was asked to become a
doula, learning as an apprentice to Cynthia Jackson in Detroit.
29 
Eventually I got to be present for the

birth of Autumn’s third child, and be part of her support during the miscarriage of her fourth child.
Life and death are transitions that want to be held gently.
I have now been a doula and birth supporter for several births. The final read through of this book
was actually delayed because a dear friend brought a perfect little one into the world and I was her
doula and could not look away from the first weeks of that precious being’s life.
Beyond birth, I have found doula to be a role that applies to many aspects of life. Birthwork teaches
us to engage tension, but not to indulge drama. It is another form of facilitation, making the miraculous
experience of birth as easy as possible, intervening with any systems that make the process harder,
helping the family attend to each other and listen to what the body is saying, staying focused on the
possibility and wisdom of the body. Standing or sitting with someone as they realize, remember their
own wholeness—that is the work of the healer and the doula.
My healing work is just pushing back the external world, making more space for people to feel
themselves. Detroit musician/spiritual teacher/friend Sterling Toles told me he considers himself a
“dressing room where people can try on their most authentic selves,” and this has been a guiding
visual for me when I am engaged in my healing work. As he said in the opening of the 2016 Allied
Media Conference, “It’s ok to feel beautiful in the process of creating justice.”
Writer/Artist
My mom says writing came first, and it certainly has been the most consistent kind of work I have
done in my life, writing, creating, drawing, singing. I am better at some forms of creating than others,
but I enjoy all of it. And I have to write, in some form, every day. It’s how I understand the world.
Toni Cade Bambara, a Black feminist writer-organizer who left lots of wisdom for us, said two
things that I turn to when I start to wonder if art is enough of a contribution. On one hand, as I
referenced earlier, she said “The role of the artist is to make the revolution irresistible.”
30 
On the
other hand, she said that “Writing is one of the ways I participate in transformation.” From this
wisdom combination, I see that I am charged to write about the revolutions I long for, and that any
writing I do, even if it isn’t explicitly political, is still a transformative act. I apply this to my songs,
my self-portraits, my poems—understanding that when a Black, queer, thick artist woman
intentionally takes up space, it creates a new world.
Independent Science/Visionary Fiction Scholar
I read sci fi and visionary fiction as political, sacred, and philosophical text, and I engage with
others who read it that way. I spent the first part of my life learning what history’s victors wanted to
tell me to believe about the past, including the simple assumption that it was the past. I see massive
patterns of violence and inequality in history, which perpetuate in the daily news. Science fiction,
particularly visionary fiction, is where I go when I need the medicine of possibility applied to the
trauma of human behavior. While I have done deep dives in the work of Samuel Delaney, Ursula Le
Guin, and others, I started this scholarship in earnest with Octavia. She presented perspectives on the
future that were terrifying and compelling, and she took my breath away with her ideas for how to
navigate change.
She said:
all that you touch
you change

all that you change
changes you
the only lasting truth
is change
god is change
31
If we accept the scientific and science fictional premise that change is a constant condition of this
universe, then it becomes important that we learn to be in right relationship with change.
After much deliberation I have opted not to include a bunch of Butler analysis and spoilers in this
book—her work is incredibly strong and clear. If you haven’t read it, feel free to put this book down
and go read everything she wrote
32 
and then pick this back up. Warning: I reference her constantly and
casually in these pages, as if you have also read the work and know what I am talking about.
That’s true of almost everyone I reference—this book is not about analyzing other people’s books or
work. If you want more, go read the people and books I reference, and then consume the works they
reference. I want to move forward from where others ended, or at least from the point of impact
between their work and my own.
So Wheatley, Boggs, Butler, my family, my passions—all of these are teachers of emergence for me.
I have also been impressed and developed by the speeches of biomimicry teacher Janine Benyus,
the mycelium/mushroom scholar Paul Stametz, the organizing model of Ella Baker, the Toltec
worldview presented in The Four Agreements by Don Miguel Ruiz, and the Tao Te Ching by Lao Tzu
(particularly the interpretations of Stephen Mitchell and Le Guin).
I have learned that feeling matters, that feeling is an important and legitimate way of knowing. This
learning has come most formally through Somatics (particularly the social justice and somatics blend
found in generative somatics, through the work of Staci Haines, Spenta Kandawalla, Liu Hoi-man,
Lisa Thomas Adeyemo, Chris Lymbertos, Vassilissa Johri, and Richard Strozzi-Heckler), and Robert
Gass’s work on the art of transformation now developing and evolving into emergent strategies at the
Social Transformation Project under the leadership of Jodie Tonita, Eugene Kim, Idelisse Malave,
and others.
And Star Wars (the force); William Gibson (Idoru); China Mieville (dream shit); Nalo Hopkinson
(sensual breathtaking magic); the Zapatistas (many worlds exist); the Black Panthers (meet the
biological needs of a community as a mode of organizing); Black feminist artists Audre Lorde, June
Jordan, Lucille Clifton, and Toni Cade Bambara (create as a form of revolution); and many more.
Early on in my exploration of this kind of work, Marianne Manilov and Alissa Hauser, network
cultivators, invited me to hold a year of community practice with the Engage Network. They and the
participants in that year-long journey were also teachers—Anasa Troutman, Kerri Kelly, Jenny Lee,
Jodie Tonita, Jane Sung E Bai, Gibran Rivera, Mike Norman, Jidan Koon, and Navina Khanna, thank
you.
I also held a transformative phone-based community of practice for a year after a Creative Change
gathering in Utah. It had some very vulnerable and beautiful emergent elements to it that taught me
about curating soil that is fertile for relationship building.
And then there are all the other incredible people whose voices are woven throughout this book and
online appendix. They each taught me something about emergent strategy. And there are many more
teachers whose voices are not in this book.

I think that is the best I can do on explicit lineage—feel free to remind me of anything I missed.
Basically, I see emergence everywhere and I feel positively obsessed with the possibilities of being
awake to it.
“Without positive obsession, there is nothing at all.”
—Octavia Butler
33
1 I’ve developed my ideas of “shaping change” in conversation with Octavia Butler’s concept of “shaping God,” which is introduced in
the Earthseed verses of her Parable of the Sower (New York: Four Walls Eight Windows, 1993).
2 Nick Obolensky, Complex Adaptive Leadership: Embracing Paradox and Uncertainty (Burlington, VT: Gower, 2014).
3 “Radical simply means ‘grasping things at the root.’”—Angela Davis, “Let Us All Rise Together” Address, Spelman College, reprinted
in Women, Culture and Politics (New York, Random House, 1989).
4 If that’s you, then yay! I bet you’re hella smart—help get us all free!
5 “The mountains, streams, valleys, oceans, deserts, and all things are related to our thoughts and actions. All things are in relationship
with each other.”—Jasmine Wallace, a Tsalagi (Cherokee) medicine woman, https://certified.naturallygrown.org/producers/4166.
6 Octavia Butler, Dawn (New York: Grand Central Publishing, 1987).
7 Emergent Strategy Ideation Institute’s website can be found at http://www.alliedmedia.org/esii.
8 Hazif, The Gift: Poems by Hafiz, the Great Sufi Master, trans. Daniel Ladinsky (New York: Penguin Books, 1999).
9 Though I wrote this before the Queen released Her album, I would be pleased if you thought I was referencing the lyric “love god
herself,” from “Don’t Hurt Yourself” on Beyoncé’s masterpiece Lemonade (2015).
10 Octavia Butler, Parable of the Sower.
11 Ibid.
12 Janine M. Benyus, Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature (New York: Harper Perennial, 2002).
13 Kenny Bailey is one of the founders of the Design Studio for Innovation, a Boston-based artistic research and development outfit that
serves civil society.
14 The goddess-writer Claudia Rankine (author of the award-winning book, Citizen) and Terry Marshall (of Intelligent Mischief, a
creative intelligent design lab) each speak of this in different ways in their work. They have both inspired me and transformed my
understanding of the importance of creative work.
15 From the November 2014 acceptance speech for the National Book Foundation’s medal for Distinguished Contribution to American
Letters.
16 From interview with Kay Bonetti, 1982.
17 Margaret Wheatley, Leadership and the New Science (Oakland: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 1992).
18 I first experienced this “inch wide mile deep” language when it was used to speak about the work of the Detroit Future Youth
program at Allied Media Projects. I’ve since heard it used to speak of work that prioritizes depth in community organizing, and
understands that meaningful scale depends on deep transformative work, rather than surface widespread work.
19 Confession: As the first daughter of a colonel in the US Army, I cut my political teeth in conversation with my father, who served as
the Chief of War Plans while I was in college.
20 BOLD is a national Leadership Training Program designed to help rebuild Black (African-American, Caribbean, African, Afro-
Latino) social justice infrastructure in order to organize Black communities more effectively and to re-center Black leadership in the
US social justice movement. More information available at www.boldblackorganizing.org.
21 Yes! A gender-neutral term for the children of my siblings, learned from Chicago-based healer/writer Tanuja Jagernauth.
22 “Visionary fiction” is a term coined by my Octavia’s Brood: Science Fiction from Social Justice Movements co-editor Walidah
Imarisha to describe the work of people who use fiction to advance justice and liberation.
23 “Organic intellectuals” comes from Antonio Gramsci and refers to intellectuals outside of traditional academic institutions, intellectuals
who develop organically in counter relationship to the dominant culture. For more on Grace’s concept of “dialectical humanism”—and
its relationship to Karl Marx’s dialectical materialism—see the Boggs Center website at http://www.boggscenter.org/.
24 Invincible should write a book about emergence—they do much more rigorous research on the science of things than I seem capable
of. For more about the amazing work of Complex Movements check out https://emergencemedia.org/pages/complex-movements.
25 I learned woe from the artist/rapper Drake, and I am deeply grateful for it. Actually, I owe gratitude to the Toronto rapper and
producer Devontée who uses it to refer to his crew—who are always “working on excellence.” It passed from him to fellow
Canadian rapper Drake before I picked up on it. I use this term all the time and thank these men profusely.
26 Harm Reduction is an approach to policy and care that reduces the harm that comes from drugs, alcohol, sex and sex work, and other
legal and illegal human behaviors. For a good introduction, visit http://harmreduction.org/about-us/principles-of-harm-reduction/
27 DJ scholar Lynnée Denise, a core relationship and learning ground in my life, speaks of this as “misery resistance.” She notices the
practices, particularly in Black communities, of dancing, singing, and loving as forms of resisting and releasing oppression from the
collective Black body.

28 “People are constantly creating what we call ‘maroon spaces’—free communities, free platforms for thought and expression. I think
that that’s just in the DNA of Black Atlantic culture.… There’s always the imperative towards the emancipated space.”—Greg Tate,
from an interview with Giovanni Russonello, April 30, 2015, http://www
.capitalbop.com/greg-tate-on-burnt-sugar-afrofuturism-and-the-
maroon-spaces-that-music-allows/.
29 Cynthia Jackson grew up in a home of natural birth and many siblings, and has been working as a doula as long as she can remember.
She is now working as a home birth midwife and doula in Detroit. More information about her work can be found at http://www
.sacredrosebirthingservices.com/.
30 Interview by Kay Bonetti, 1982.
31 Butler, Parable of the Sower.
32 Including Survivor, which was published by Doubleday in 1978 but never reprinted because Octavia didn’t like it, calling it her “Star
Trek novel.” I think it is a useful read to see her growth and idea formation.
33 Butler, Parable of the Sower.

PRINCIPLES OF EMERGENT STRATEGY
In the study and practice of emergent strategy, there are core principles that have emerged and that guide
me in learning and using this idea and method in the world. I gather them here with the expectation
that they will grow.
Small is good, small is all. (The large is a reflection of the small.)
Change is constant. (Be like water).
34
There is always enough time for the right work.
There is a conversation in the room that only these people at this moment can have.
35 
Find it.
Never a failure, always a lesson.
36
Trust the People. (If you trust the people, they become trustworthy).
37
Move at the speed of trust.
38 
Focus on critical connections more than critical mass—build the
resilience by building the relationships.
Less prep, more presence.
What you pay attention to grows.
Complex Movements is also studying the relationship between emergence and movements for social justice. Their emblem system is a
gorgeous way of learning properties of nature we can apply to our work.
Mycelium is the part of the fungus that grows underground in thread-like formations. It connects roots to one another and
breaks down plant material to create healthier ecosystems. Mycelium is the largest organism on earth. Interconnectedness.
Remediation. Detoxification.
Ants. Ant societies function through individual ants acting collectively in accord with simple, local information to carry on all of
their survival activities. Every ant relies on the work of others in producing their own work. Cooperative work. Collective
Sustainability.

Ferns are a form of fractal. A fractal is an object or quantity that displays self similarity, which means it looks roughly the same
at any scale. Small-scale solutions impact the whole system. Use similar principles to build at all scales.
The Wavicle, or wave-particle duality, suggests that all objects exhibit both wave and partical properties. Between observations
as it evolves on its own, it behaves like a wave; distributed across space, exploring different intermixing paths to all possible
destinations. However, when its location or speed is measured, it appears definite and concrete, like a particle. Its wave nature
gives this measurement a curious property: the more certain we are about either speed or position, the more uncertain we
become about the other. Uncertainty/doubt. Valuing both process and outcome.
Starlings. The synchronized movement patterns of a starling flock is also known as a murmuration. Guided by simple rules,
starling murmurations can react to their environment as a group without a central leader orchestrating their choices; in any
instant, any part of the flock can transform the movement of the whole flock. Collective leadership/partnership. Adaptability.
Dandelions. The dandelion flower head can change into a white, globular seed head overnight. Each seed has a tiny
parachute that allows it to spread far and wide in the wind. The entire plant has medicinal properties. Dandelions are often
mistakenly identified as weeds, aggressively removed, but are hard to uproot; the top is pulled but the long taproot remains.
Resilience. Resistance. Regeneration. Decentralization.
34 “You must be shapeless, formless, like water. When you pour water in a cup, it becomes the cup. When you pour water in a bottle, it
becomes the bottle. When you pour water in a teapot, it becomes the teapot. Water can drip and it can crash. Become like water my
friend,” Bruce Lee, Bruce Lee: A Warrior’s Journey (Warner Home Video, 2000).
35 Idea articulated by Taj James in the cofacilitation of environmental justice resource redistribution initiative Building Equity and
Alignment’s inaugural meeting in 2013.
36 Rihanna has this concept tattooed on her chest.
37 This is an inversion of the quote “If you don’t trust the people, they become untrustworthy,” from Stephen Mitchell’s translation, Lao
Tzu, Tao Te Ching (New York: HarperCollins, 1988).
38 This is communications strategist Mervyn Marcano’s remix of Stephen Covey’s “speed of trust” concept.

ELEMENTS OF EMERGENT STRATEGY
In both workshops and in writing this book, I’ve noticed that it’s pretty impossible to completely separate
any one of the elements of emergent strategy from the others.
Or rather, at the same time, each of these elements is distinct and is totally connected to every other
element. When I speak about them, they shift in my mouth. In writing this book, seven elements
became six, and they rearranged themselves several times to land in this order. It is not random, but it
is not right either—it’s just where things landed.
I have seen other people learning about emergence and applying it to human systems and social
justice systems in the world as well, and they have made good sense to me.
For example, Complex Movements is a Detroit-based artist collective supporting the transformation
of communities by exploring the connections of complex science and social justice movements
through multimedia interactive performance work. The Complex Movements crew uses an emblem
system with ferns, ants, wavicles, mycelium, and more to engage communities in thinking about the
formations and movements of the future.
The particular organization of elements I present here is a snapshot of a theory in perpetual motion.
This is the current configuration, which gives me the most space to reflect on my experiences in
social justice movements, to invite others into conversation about how we work, and to articulate my
longing for something different. One of the ways I was able to identify these was by formulating my
critique of the ways that social justice movements have felt, and where my longing for something else
was strongest.
Grace often said that every crisis is an opportunity, which is amazing theoretically, and requires
great emotional fortitude in practice, as well as the maturity to understand that the negative realization
of that theory is “disaster capitalism.”
39
Sitting with the questions of how I could transform some of the heartbreak I have experienced in
nonprofit work into lessons that could offer other paths forward, I found that part of the opportunity
was to pay deeper attention to how the natural world has solved these same problems. I do believe
that what we pay attention to grows, so I wanted to stop growing the crises, the critique. The elements
in this book are a way to shift my attention to the positive, to what I want to grow.
I like the word biomimicry, and I love knowing that the practices of mimicking the natural world
have been happening since humans came into existence. This is actually an ancient practice, a
recovery rather than a discovery.
“Biomimicry is basically taking a design challenge and then finding an ecosystem that has already solved that
challenge, and literally trying to emulate what you learn. There are three types of biomimicry—one is copying form
and shape, another is copying a process, like photosynthesis in a leaf, and the third is mimicking at an
ecosystem’s level, like building a nature-inspired city.”
—Janine Benyus
The elements I explore reference aspects of the natural world operating at each of these levels,
though the bulk of examples aim at the systems and processes.
For each of these elements, we spiral from the simple understanding to the more complex ways of

thinking about applying the element to our movement work. I define what the element is according to a
dictionary, point out some of the places we see this element in nature, then offer up writing I’ve done
on the element, moving from the personal through organizational to movement or collective levels.
Towards the end is a brief assessment tool you can use to reflect on how much emergent strategy is
showing up in your life and work. Then I share some of the emergent strategy practices and tools I
have worked with to create tangible differences in movement work.
I’ll add this because of some of the doubt I’ve seen people experience when approaching these
concepts—some people are more comfortable with emergent strategy than others, but I don’t think this
has to do with personality or intelligence. We are already emergent beings, just by our very existence.
But we’ve been tricked away from it.
Nature vs. nurture is part of this—and then there is what I think of as anti-nurturing—the ways we in
a western/US context are socialized to work against respecting the emergent processes of the world
and each other:
We learn to disrespect Indigenous and direct ties to land.
We learn to be quiet, polite, indirect, and submissive, not to disturb the status quo.
We learn facts out of context of application in school. How will this history, science, math
show up in our lives, in the work of growing community and home?
We learn that tests and deadlines are the reasons to take action. This puts those with good
short-term memories and a positive response to pressure in leadership positions, leading to
urgency-based thinking, regardless of the circumstance.
We learn to compete with each other in a scarcity-based economy that denies and destroys
the abundant world we actually live in.
We learn to deny our longings and our skills, and to do work that occupies our hours without
inspiring our greatness.
We learn to manipulate each other and sell things to each other, rather than learning to
collaborate and evol