



“From the moment I began an Integral Life Practice, it was as if my life was
assigned a new trajectory and course setting from deep within the cockpit of
my soul. ‘Glory upon Glory’ is the way my days are unfolding since I began to
practice. An ILP is an incredible catalyst to growth in ways that I could never
have imagined. See for yourself!”
—EDDIE KOWALCZYK, lead singer-songwriter of Live
“Integral Life Practice is an extraordinary achievement. Comprehensive,
detailed, and powerfully rational, it inspires any and all of us to consider more
deeply how profound is our embrace of the life we are living. e searing
clarity of the integral perspective leaps off every page of this manual for
personal evolution, clearly illuminating what it means to be fully alive!”
—ANDREW COHEN, spiritual teacher and founder of EnlightenNext
“Ken Wilber’s Integral eory has created a road map. Now Terry Patten,
Adam Leonard, and Marco Morelli have added a GPS (Global Practicing
System) with Integral Life Practice. Travelers on the spiritual path will nd this
book indispensable.”
— BROTHER DAVID STEINDL-RAST, Benedictine monk, author of Listening
Heart: e Spirituality of Sacred Sensuousness and Gratefulness, e Heart of
Prayer: An Approach to Life in Fullness and cofounder of Gratefulness.org
“Once again, Ken Wilber and his colleagues have taken a big subject,
swallowed the whole thing and the kitchen sink too, and then spent years
working to understand it, digest it, metabolize it, and then translate it into
clear prose and helpful practices. And the outcome? is wonderfully helpful
manual for living: Integral Life Practice. A fantastic resource for a more
peaceful, meaningful, intelligent, and exuberant life.”
—ELIZABETH LESSER, author of Broken Open: How Difficult Times Can
Help Us Grow, e Seeker’s Guide, and cofounder of Omega Institute
“Integral Life Practice will help you build the healthy foundation from which
you can wake up to your transcendent nature or Big Mind. Western aspirants

have long needed a universal practice manual that wisely draws upon ancient
traditions and modern science and psychology. Now we have it—an inspiring,
straightforward guide for living a truly harmonious, awakened life.”
—ZEN MASTER DENNIS GENPO MERZEL, author of Big Mind, Big Heart:
Finding Your Way
“Ken Wilber and the authors of this clearly written, sensible, well-informed
book are fellow explorers with George Leonard and me in the development of
integral transformative practices. Such practices grow out of a philosophic
vision dawning across the world that joins our aspiration for personal and
social transformation with both science and the contemplative traditions. is
book will advance this developing worldview and the disciplines needed to
actualize it.”
—MICHAEL MURPHY, author of e Future of the Body and e Life We Are
Given and cofounder of Esalen Institute
“Integral Life Practice offers a nely honed distillation of some of the most
effective and universal practices from the great wisdom traditions, at the same
time presenting a context for practice that is both soaring and sensible. True to
its title, it takes seriously the human need for fully balanced development, for
depth as well as breadth, for psychological as well as spiritual development, for
softness and toughness, for ethics and bold experimentation. Beautifully
written, laid out in accessible modules, the book is truly an on-and-off-the-mat
guide to 21
st
-century practice.”
—SWAMI SALLY KEMPTON, author of e Heart of Meditation: Pathways to
a Deeper Experience
“What if we could draw from the best of the world’s ancient contemplative
traditions as well as contemporary psychological and somatic therapies, and
weld them into a power program for transforming our lives? Now we can, and
Integral Life Practice is a happy result of this possibility.”
—ROGER WALSH MD, PHD, University of California, author of Essential
Buddhism: e Seven Central Practices

“is book spells out how to apply Integral philosophy to everyday life by
working with body, mind, spirit, and the deeper psychological aspects of
ourselves. Integral Life Practice presents a useful map of one’s existential
condition leading toward the attainment of the highest states of
consciousness.”
—TRALEG KYABGON RINPOCHE
“Integral Life Practice is a masterpiece guide of grounded, intelligent, self-
transforming wisdom integrating the insights of all the great traditions of
truth.”
—CAROLINE MYSS, author of Anatomy of the Spirit and Entering the Castle
“Integral Life Practice brings the integral system from the mind to doable action
in life. Here is a treasure of integral Upaya.”
—RABI ZALMAN SCHACHTER-SHALOMI, past holder of the World Wisdom
Chair of Naropa University
“Integral Life Practice represents a particular milestone. It gives a lucid and easy
to understand summary of the Integral thought-system, without dumbing it
down—no mean feat. What’s more, it describes in an engaging and practical
way what to do in order to live from this elegant and inclusive worldview. If
you want a clear and easy-to-follow map for waking up, read this book.”
—BILL HARRIS, Director, Centerpointe Research Institute and creator of
Holosync Meditation Technology
“Here we learn, through integral wisdom and disciplines, how to be freer and
more fully authentic by ironing out the peaks of higher consciousness
development into every nook and cranny of daily life. is is the secret of the
integral life: transcending while including, and being there while getting there
every single step of the way. Get ready to train your mind, open your heart,
and awaken to your true universal Self.”
—LAMA SURYA DAS, author of Awakening the Buddha Within: Tibetan
Wisdom for the Western World and founder of the Dzogchen Meditation
Centers

Sign up to learn more about our books and receive special offers from
Shambhala Publications.
Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.

INTEGRAL LIFE PRACTICE
A 21
st
-Century Blueprint for Physical Health, Emotional Balance, Mental Clarity,
and Spiritual Awakening
KEN WILBER, TERRY PATTEN, ADAM LEONARD, and MARCO
MORELLI
INTEGRAL BOOKS
Boston & London
2012

INTEGRAL BOOKS
An imprint of Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Horticultural Hall
300 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
www.shambhala.com
© 2008 by Ken Wilber, Terry Patten, Adam Leonard, and Marco Morelli
Cover design Nita Ybarra
Cover images courtesy of iStockphoto.com, BigStockPhoto.com, Dreamstime.com, and Fotolia.com, and
© of the respective artists. Also thanks to Wikipedia.org (Public Domain Portal) and Jenn Rensel (paints
image, Flickr.com user “jenn_jenn,” creative commons copyright).
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Wilber, Ken
Integral life practice: a 21st-century blueprint for physical health, emotional balance, mental clarity, and
spiritual awakening / Ken Wilber . . . [et al.].
p. cm
Includes index.
eISBN 978-0-8348-2243-6
ISBN 978-1-59030-467-9 (pbk.: alk. paper)
1. Self-actualization (Psychology) I. Title.
BF637.S4W487 2008
158.1—dc22
2008015205

CONTENTS AT A GLANCE
Preface
Acknowledgments
e Great Experiment
1. Why Practice?
2. What Is Integral Life Practice?
3. Get a Feel for Integral Awareness
4. e Shadow Module
5. e Mind Module
6. e Body Module
7. e Spirit Module
8. Integral Ethics
9. Living Your Life as Practice
10. Navigating the Practice Life
e Unique Self
Index
About the Authors

CONTENTS
Preface
Acknowledgments
e Great Experiment
1. Why Practice
About the Practices in is Book
1-Minute Module: What’s Your Deepest Motivation?
2. What Is Integral Life Practice?
A Radically Inclusive Approach
Integral Life Practice Is “Powered by AQAL”
Launch Pad: 4 Core Modules
Gold Star Practices
Pressed for Time? Try a 1-Minute Module
Time to Devote Yourself Deeply? e Principles of ILP Still Apply
Principles of Practice
e Smart Way to Wake Up
3. Get a Feel for Integral Awareness
Four Dimensions of Being: I, We, It, and Its
All 4 Quadrants, All the Time
1-Minute Module: Get a Feel for Integral Awareness
4. e Shadow Module
What Is the Shadow?
e 3-2-1 Shadow Process
e Origins of the Shadow
Bringing the Light of Consciousness to the Shadow

Gold Star Practice: e 3-2-1 Shadow Process
Sample 1: Phil Visits His Childhood Friend
Sample 2: Kathy Gives Her Power to Bill
Sample 3: Tony Meditates with a Monster
1-Minute Module: e 3-2-1 Shadow Process
More Advanced Forms of Shadow Work
Lighter Shades of Shadow
e Strange Logic of the Psyche
Transmuting Your Authentic Primary Emotions
Ongoing Emotional Transmutation
Evolving Your Relationship with Your Emotions
Integrating Light and Dark, Spirit and Shadow
5. e Mind Module
e Practice of Taking Perspectives
Increasing Your Capacity to Take Perspectives
Elements of the Integral Framework
AQAL Integral eory
AQAL: All Quadrants, All Levels, All Lines, All States, All Types
A Place for Everything In Your Life
Quadrants
Levels of Consciousness
Lines of Development
Answering Life’s Questions
Levels and Lines: Many Paths, One Mountain
A Spectrum of Worldviews
How We Participate in Co-Creating Worldviews
e 4 Quadrants Reloaded
States of Consciousness
State Training
1-Minute Module: States of Consciousness
What’s Your Type?
Identifying Your Myers-Briggs Type
How Personality Types Inform Your Practice

Applications of the Integral Framework
Using AQAL to See a Bigger World
1-Minute Module: Quad Scan
What Perspective Are You Coming From?
What Is Not Integral
An Integral Operating System
6. e Body Module
Redening the Body Integrally
It Takes ree to Tango
e 3-Body Workout
Step 1: Grounding in the Causal Body
Step 2: Energizing the Subtle Body
Step 3: Strengthening the Gross Body
Step 4: Gross-to-Subtle Stretching and Cool-Down
Step 5: Resting in the Causal Body
Summing Up: 3-Body Workout Principles
1-Minute Module: 3-Body Workout
Gross Body Practices
Physical Exercise Is Essential!
Strength Training: A Core Practice for Optimum Health
Gold Star Practice: Focus Intensity Training (FIT)
1-Minute Module: Strength Training
Muscle Groups
Flying High with Cardio
1-Minute Module: Aerobic Workout
Sports, Dance, and Neuromuscular Coordination
Stretching
Integral Nutrition
e 4 Quadrants of Integral Nutrition
Subtle Body Practices
Subtle Body Exercise
Yoga, Qigong, and the Martial Arts
e Core of Energy Practice

Subtle Mastery
Conducting Intensity
Conducting Sexual Energy
Subtle Breath Practices
e Body Module’s “Inner Game”
Head, Heart, and Hara
Subtle Body Practice for Managing Your Inner States
Breathe and Feel. Always
Big Heart = Big Mind = Integral Feeling-Awareness
Resting in the Causal Body
Sleeping to Awaken
Constant Consciousness
7. e Spirit Module
Spiritual Practice for an Integral Age
An Integral Spirit
e Many Colors of Spirit
Can You Feel It?
Practicing the Spirit Module
Spirit How?
e 3 Faces of Spirit
Integral Spirituality Engages All 3 Faces of Spirit
Exploring the 3 Faces of Spirit
Spirituality in Relationship
Spiritual Community
Integral Devotion
Opening to Devotion
Integral eism?
Stages of Devotion
Trans-Rational Devotion
Integrating Life Practice through Devotion
Integral Meditation Practices
Meditation: Making Spirit Real
Meditation Practices

Basic Breath Meditation
I AM: Guided Meditation
Gold Star Practice: I AM: Mantra Meditation
Gold Star Practice: Integral Inquiry
1-Minute Module: Integral Inquiry
Gold Star Practice: e 3 Faces of Spirit
1-Minute Module: e 3 Faces of Spirit
Gold Star Practice: Compassionate Exchange
e Perfect Practice
8. Integral Ethics
e Need for Integral Ethics
But Isn’t Ethics Boring, Stiing, Oppressive . . .?
e Assault on Ethics
We Must Discover a Higher Ethical Sensibility
e Framework of Integral Ethics
Growing Ethically
e Basic Moral Intuition
Who Do You row to the Sharks?
Ground, Intrinsic, and Relative Value
Meeting Ethical Dilemmas
Morality and Ethics
Don’t Be Partial: 4 Quadrants of Ethical Practice
e Art of Integral Ethics
ree Reasons for Living Ethically
Take an Uninching Look at the Costs of Unethical Behavior
Completing Your Karmas
It’s Not What You Did, It’s What You Do Next
Ethics and Your Relationship to Yourself
Masculine Self-Compassion
Feminine Self-Compassion
e Ethics of Shadow Work
Flying Under Altitude
Expanded Ethical Responsibility

e Lightness of Integral Ethics
9. Living Your Life as Practice: Relationships, Work, Parenting, Creativity, and
Other Additional Modules
e Flesh and Bones of ILP
Everybody’s Got eir Stuff
Effort, Surrender, Purpose, and Commitment
A Quick Tour of Some Additional Modules
Work
Money
Time Management
Communication
Intimate Relationship
Sexuality
Family and Parenting
Community
Service
Nature
Creativity
Will
Using the Integral Framework in Daily Life
Viewing Additional Modules through Five Integral Lenses
Using the Quadrants
Levels and Lines of Parenting
States of Practice
Living Your Types
Affirmations: A Power Tool for Actualizing Desired Changes
Practicing Perfection
10. Navigating the Practice Life
Part I: Designing Your ILP
Elizabeth and Jeremy: Two Examples of the ILP Design Process
1. Assess Your Current Situation
2. Identify What’s Missing

3. Choose Your Practices
4. Practice!
5. Be Flexible
6. Fine-Tune Continuously
7. Get Support
Spend Time in Good Company
On Working with a Teacher
Core Values, Vision, and Life Purpose
ILP Blueprint
ILP Weekly Tracking Log
Part II: e Art of Integral Practice
Everyday Expanded Awareness
Practice Tips and Principles
Always Practice Discernment
Take Responsibility
Free Your Energy and Attention
Be Your Own Best Friend
Resisting Resistance?
Practice Feels Good. And Bad
Expect Both Good Days and Bad Days
Don’t Waste Time Beating Yourself Up
Keep It Simple
Integrate Your Practice
Practice and the Fast Pace of a Busy Life
Let Love Open the Door
Allow Paradox to Expand You
Seasons and Phases in the Practice Life
e Unique Self
Index
About the Authors
E-mail Sign-Up



PUBLISHER’S NOTE
Some e-readers may have difficulty displaying larger images within this book.
For easier viewing, these select images are also provided at
www.shambhala.com/integrallifepractice.

PREFACE
Welcome to the world of Integral! e fact that you have picked up this book
means that you are ready to begin not just thinking about Integral but
practicing and applying it as well. is is a truly momentous occasion, to judge
from the developmental research itself.
Developmental models are in general agreement that human beings, from
birth, go through a series of stages or waves of growth and development. e
lower, earlier, junior stages are initial, partial, and fragmented views of the
world, whereas the upper stages are integrated, comprehensive, and genuinely
holistic. Because of this, the earlier stages are often called “rst tier,” and the
higher stages are called “second tier.”
e difference between the two tiers is truly profound. As pioneering
developmental researcher Clare Graves put it, with second tier an individual
“goes through a momentous leap of meaning.” at leap is what Integral is all
about—Integral inking and—yes—Integral Practice. At the Integral stages
of development, the entire universe starts to make sense, to hang together, to
actually appear as a uni-verse—a “one world”—a single, unied, integrated
world that unites not only different philosophies and ideas about the world,
but different practices for growth and development as well.
Integral Life Practice is just such an integrated practice, a practice that will
help you grow and develop to your fullest capacities—to your ultimate
Freedom and greatest Fullness in the world at large (in relationships, in work,
in spirituality, in career, in play, in life itself ). ILP is about developing your
greatest FREEDOM from the world—freedom from your limitations, freedom
from fragmentation, freedom from partialities—and your truest FULLNESS
in the world—a fullness that includes and embraces all the seemingly partial
aspects of yourself and your world into a seamless, whole, ultimately fullled
life. Freedom and Fullness—to transcend all of life and to include all of life,

unfolding and fullling your greatest capacities—is what Integral Life Practice
is about.
As such, this “transcending and including” contains modules that address
practices for the body, mind, spirit, and shadow dimensions of your own
being. Because it is inclusive, this practice contains a distilled and condensed
series of practices that are taken from premodern, modern, and postmodern
approaches to growth and development. It is an “all-inclusive” practice in the
sense that it takes the very best practices from all of them, and puts them
together in a larger framework that uses—and makes sense of—all of them.
Premodern practices include the world’s great wisdom traditions and the
meditation practices that drive them. Modern practices include scientic
studies of human growth and ways to induce it. Postmodern practices include
a pluralistic and multicultural composite map of the human territory—the
territory of you—and ways to include (and not marginalize) all of the
important dimensions of your own being (physical, emotional, mental, and
spiritual—in self, culture, and nature).
Putting all of these together creates a “cross training” for human growth and
spiritual awakening, a cross training that dramatically accelerates all of its
dimensions—body, mind, spirit, and shadow—producing faster, more
effective, more efficient practices than were ever possible prior to this time. It is
the comprehensive, truly holistic, extraordinarily inclusive nature of Integral
Life Practice that makes it the simplest practice you can do to truly wake up.
Other approaches have part of the puzzle and therefore give you partial
practices (and partial successes), whereas Integral Life Practice gives you a
composite and comprehensive practice that covers all the essential bases,
increasing the effectiveness and quickness of each, compared to when they are
practiced alone. It is the dramatically increased speed and effectiveness of ILP
that is one of its hallmarks.
ILP is practicing from the leading edge of evolution itself, from the Integral
stages and waves that are just beginning to evolutionarily unfold in humanity
at large. Being grounded in these Integral stages, ILP embodies, emerges, and
attracts individuals to the same stages that produced it. Put differently, Integral
Life Practice is a second-tier practice—it comes from second-tier, and it draws
consciousness itself to second tier. us, it trains both “altitude” and

“aptitude”—altitude or vertical growth in consciousness, and aptitude or
specic training in horizontal capacities. All of this is included in the Integral
Life Practice, which the following pages will fully train you in. In short, ILP is
a practice aimed at helping you discover your own “momentous leap of
meaning,” a leap that will radiantly affect every aspect of your life.
So, once again, welcome to Integral. One of the advantages of this particular
book is the team of writers that created it. ey have a broad and fully
qualied exposure to Integral Life Practice, both in its theory and in its actual
practice. e writing team is an integration of the richly different backgrounds
and perspectives of the co-authors. Although I did not write any of these
chapters myself, I fully participated in the writing and its review, and oversaw
the integration of the various perspectives and experiences of the writers,
reaching across generational and typological differences. at’s what Integral
Life Practice is all about—integration—and that is one of the many strengths
of this book. e style turned out to be accessible, transparent, and covering
difficult topics with an easy-to-understand clarity and humanity. I’m very
happy with the results, and proud to put my name on it.
Integral Life Practice is, as the name implies, the practice aspect of Integral
eory. Integral eory, in both its original form and critical alterations of it,
has had a profound impact on several million readers around the world. If you
want to just do Integral eory and not also Integral Practice, that is ne.
(Integral eory is itself a mental praxis, and it summarizes practices in all of
the major dimensions—it is a composite Map of the world’s most important
methodologies.) But if we take that composite Map and turn it into a
composite Practice, the result is Integral Life Practice, a practice that is
therefore grounded in the very best of Integral eory itself. For this reason,
ILP is a truly groundbreaking and leading-edge evolutionary practice for
waking up.
ank you for picking up this book and beginning your own “momentous
leap of meaning.” If you are ready, then let’s get started!
Ken Wilber
Denver, Colorado, Winter 2008

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
e book you are about to read has been thousands of years in the making. We
have written it with conscious gratitude to the visionary pioneers of the past—
those who endeavored to see further, feel deeper, love more fully, and live more
mindfully than previously done—and those who left all endeavor behind in
radical awakening. is extraordinary lineage—our ancient and modern
brothers and sisters, teachers, and spiritual heroes—evolved “up from Eden” to
create the fertile ground on which we’ve stood to birth what you now hold in
your hands.
We would like to give special mention to the courageous founders of the
human potential movement, which began in the 1960s and has been maturing
ever since. ese early practitioners experimented with new transformative
techniques, methods, and syntheses—documenting both the powers and
pitfalls of practice along the way. Especially signicant were Michael Murphy
and George Leonard, who joined Ken Wilber early on in calling for a more
balanced or Integral approach to practice, which they described in their
groundbreaking book e Life We Are Given.
We extend a huge thank you to the team of brilliant colleagues who helped
us develop many of the ideas and practices presented in the following pages.
ey include Jeff Salzman, Huy Lam, Diane Hamilton, Bert Parlee, Willow
Pearson, Rollie Stanich, Cindy Lou Golin, Soa Diaz, Brett omas, Rob
McNamara, and Shawn Phillips. ese exceptional individuals have led
numerous seminars, workshops, and practice groups, touching the lives of
thousands of people, who, through their questions, feedback, and sincere
application, also contributed to the evolution of ILP. Special appreciation goes
to Genpo Roshi, who shared his Big Mind process through which seminar
participants often glimpsed their “Original Face.” (Indeed, the Big Mind
process would have been included in this book, but it requires a full book or

DVD—or better yet, a live workshop—to truly experience it. For more
information on Big Mind, see BigMind.org.)
Others, too, like Nomali Perera, Clint Fuhs, Nicole Fegley, and Kelly Bearer
made valuable contributions, as did Frank Marrero, Ted Phelps, and Marc
Gafni (on whose work, along with that of Jonathan Gustin and Bill Plotkin,
we’ve drawn in articulating our conception of “the Unique Self ”). We also
appreciate the editors and graphic designers who contributed their talents to
this project. Our editors and readers include Liz Shaw, Kendra Crossen
Burroughs, Annie McQuade, Deborah Boyar, Jordan Luftig, and Nick
Hedlund. Joel Morrison, Kayla Morelli, and Paul Salamone created many of
the elegant graphics that appear throughout the book. We also thank Jonathan
Green, Sara Bercholz, and the entire Shambhala team, who have been helpful
and professional throughout the process.
Our personal teachers—including S. N. Goenka, Richard Weaver, Adi Da
Samraj, Rabbi Steven David Kane, Baba Muktananda, John Haught,
Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche, Byron Katie, Gangaji, Doc Childre, Rabbi
Shaya Isenberg, Professor M. C. Dillon, Michael Scheisser, Adyashanti,
Candice O’Denver, Genpo Roshi, Susanne Cook-Greuter, and too many
others to name—inspired and awakened us to the insights we share in these
pages. We’ve been further uplifted, informed, and claried by our friends,
colleagues, and teachers at Integral Spiritual Center, including Father omas
Keating, Brother David Steindl-Rast, Rabbi Zalman Schacter-Shalomi, Roger
Walsh, Saniel Bonder, Patrick Sweeney, Sally Kempton, and David Deida. Also
thanks to Andrew Cohen for his penetrating advocacy in such forums as What
Is Enlightenment? magazine.
We are perhaps most deeply grateful to our beloved partners, family
members, and close friends, who have shared with us the day-to-day creative
ordeal of producing this book, and without whose loving support and
companionship it would have been far less pleasurable and fullling (if not
impossible!).
is book would not have been even remotely possible without the
monumental contributions of Ken Wilber. As the meta-author not only of this
book, but of Integral Life Practice itself, he has literally dened the eld in
which these perspectives could arise. In his books and dialogues, he has

outlined the Integral worldspace with clarity, compassion, erudition, and most
graciously, a sense of humor. As our co-author, colleague, mentor, teacher, and
friend, he has supported us from the beginning, with brilliance, eloquence, and
generosity.
Finally, we would like to acknowledge you, our reader. e evolutionary
spark that drew you to this book is the same impulse that motivated every
pioneer who ever found him- or herself on the growing edge of consciousness.
It’s in your sincere use of what follows that Integral practice comes to life. We
consider it a sacred privilege to share this embodiment of an Integral vision
with you.
Terry Patten, Adam Leonard, and Marco Morelli
Summer 2008

THE GREAT EXPERIMENT
For thousands of years, in almost all parts of the globe, human beings have
engaged in practices to transform and balance their lives. From the magical
rituals of ancient shamans, to the contemplative science of the mystical
traditions, to the latest scientic breakthroughs in health, nutrition, and
physical exercise—we have always sought a way to connect with deeper truths,
to achieve well-being and harmony, and to realize our highest potentials.
Now, in the information age, this incredible wealth of knowledge, teachings,
and techniques—our evolutionary human legacy—is available to us like never
before. e question is, how can we best use it? How can we put it all together?
How can we make sense of the myriad approaches, from such diverse places
and times, in a way that’s relevant to our individual and collective lives?
Our answer to these questions amounts to an experiment in the deepest
sense—an amazing and humbling and lifelong adventure in consciousness
itself, in humanity itself—a trek into the future of our own bodies, minds, and
spirit. at’s not to say this book presents an “experimental” or unproven
approach—far from it. Rather, it means that in order to see the “data” (and
taste the fruits) of practice, you must be willing to try the experiment yourself.
is is, we believe, one of the most exciting and rewarding of all possible
endeavors.
Integral Life Practice is a way of organizing the many practices handed down
through the centuries—along with those developed at the cutting edge of
psychology, consciousness studies, and other leading elds—using a framework
optimized for life in the 21
st 
century. It is, at once, ancient and modern,
Eastern and Western, speculative and scientic, and yet also something beyond
those dichotomies. Integral Life Practice (or ILP) is Integral— which means
“comprehensive, whole, and balanced.” It’s a synthesis of the “best of the best”
that our traditions have to offer, combined with the most state-of-the-art

transformational techniques. ILP is a free and fearless exploration of the terrain
of your own being and awareness.
e authors, along with a handful of other explorers, have been developing
ILP for over thirty years, researching the most essential keys to human growth.
We’re proud to present the results in this book. To get started, all you need is
the willingness to give it a try—to carry on the Great Experiment in your own
life.
Whether you’re a beginner or a more advanced practitioner seeking a more
integrated approach to practice, we hope this book will be exceptionally useful
to you. We look forward to helping you reach your highest aspirations, as we
grow together toward a brighter here and now.

1
Why Practice?
Integral Life Practice starts where all practice starts—with inspiration, a
yearning to grow, to become all that you can be.
Sometimes the choice to practice comes after you’ve been touched, opened,
shaken, or maybe even awakened by something or someone profoundly true.
Sometimes the decision to practice is triggered by the heartbreaking lessons of
life—the experience of intense suffering, meaninglessness, or pain.
Maybe it’s the inspiring example of someone living an uncompromised life
or the reading of a book full of mind-blowing insights or the extraordinary
presence of a wise teacher or saintly person. Maybe it’s the death of a friend or
loved one. Or maybe your conventional life is simply undone, because you
suddenly see through your own game.
Somehow you get a glimpse of a freer, clearer, more authentic, loving, and
true existence—and you want to live it.
People have been inspired like this for thousands of years. ose who got bit
by the bug often became monks, nuns, shamans, or yogis—surrendering their
lives to a mystical spiritual path. Others did it in alternative ways, becoming
samurai or martial artists—giving themselves over with great intensity to a
transformational discipline. Serious, traditional stuff, eh?
But it ain’t necessarily so. Even though there’s a lot of wisdom and beauty in
the traditions, practice by nature is extremely alive. It continually reinvents
itself. It breaks free of all bonds. It doesn’t have to be a certain way—and
certainly not only the way of the traditions. ough, of course, any tradition
can be profoundly enlivened by the spirit of practice.
In truth, the traditions have always depended on innovation and
improvisation. And so we continue the tradition of . . . breaking with
tradition, while still drinking deeply from the wisdom of the past. Why?

Because the world keeps changing. We keep changing. Human life has evolved
—and so has practice. A personalized Integral Life Practice has many layers
and dimensions. It goes as deep as you do, and exes to t your unique life. It
can and will go through countless cycles and mutations. But the essence of ILP
is simple, and it embodies the intention of authentic practice in every context,
ancient or modern: to be true, real, and whole—to wake up in all directions
and dimensions of your being.
Integral Life Practice means living for real. It’s getting real with life—
perhaps like never before. Or it’s taking the real-ness you already have to a
higher, more integrated level. ILP expresses your impulse to be as fully aware as
possible—now and now and now—and to grow in that awareness over time.
It’s also founded in deep care—care for ourselves, for others, and for this
mysterious existence. is care inspires us to want to make a difference, to give
more, to cut through the bullshit of narrow and fragmented views, and to
magnify the freedom, love, openness, and depth in us, in others, and in this
beautiful, terrible world.
And, from a certain perspective, practice is simply what is—it’s a personal
choice and a genuine lifestyle—not really something to make a big fuss about.
. . .
Here are a few more possible reasons for engaging an ILP:
Embracing and working with crisis, pain, or suffering
Becoming a better person—on all levels, in all areas
Living with integrity and excellence
Getting over yourself
Waking up!
As a way to understand everything or make sense of it all
Living according to your highest ideals
Becoming more fully alive and creative
Finding and/or living your deepest purpose
Loving and caring for others more fully
Making your highest contribution
Communing with life, the universe, and Spirit

Participating in the evolution of consciousness
Because you’re in love with the Mystery (or God)
No specic reason—it’s just what you’re drawn to do
Many people come to ILP after an experience with a specic type of
practice, which, at a certain point, no longer seems full or inclusive enough.
ILP makes room for you to bring everything to the path:
You may have experience training for physical excellence or competitive
sports.
Maybe you’ve disciplined your mind and emotions for peak performance
in business.
Perhaps you’ve practiced yoga or meditation, maybe even for decades.
You may have done deep psychological exploration, facing your shadow
and exploring your deep psyche.
You might have come to practice out of your deeply felt devotion to God
or a beloved teacher or guide.
Maybe your interest in ILP comes through your scholarship, insight, and
thirst for understanding.
Some radical teachers and teachings point out the limitations buried within
many of our motivations for practice. Most of us at least begin practice as
“spiritual materialists,” seeking personal gain through spiritual pursuits,
motivated to perfect or fulll our separate-self sense. It’s just a more rened
form of egocentrism. But our exclusive commitment to self-centered motives
tends to loosen and relax as we mature. e most fundamental paradox is that
of seeking. Everyone begins the path as a seeker, and yet, the seeker must
outgrow the notion that something’s missing—and thus give up seeking—for
the path to be fullled. So our motives do naturally evolve.
But none of those motives are necessarily wrong. We don’t need to wait until
our motives are perfectly pure. People nd countless reasons for practice—and
every motivation for practice is valid . . . and partial. e beauty of practice is

that it transforms us so that we outgrow our original intentions—and keep
going! Our motivations for practicing evolve as we mature. ey each
contribute something to our path, even if we eventually leave them behind.
Ultimately, all our motivations and intentions converge in the present
moment: What is our practice right now?
ere’s no single best or right way to practice, but there are plenty of less
than optimal ways. ILP drops the baggage and cuts to the essentials, so you can
easily nd a practice that works for you, with a minimum of wasted time.
Shall we begin?
About the Practices in is Book
Peppered throughout this book are experiential practices. ese are provided to
help you convert theory into action. Some practices are explicitly “integral”
and custom designed for ILP—these are called Gold Star Practices. Others are
taken from different sources, but are adapted to an Integral context. Some
Gold Star Practices also come in an ultra-condensed form called a 1-Minute
Module. You can use one of these any time as a virtually effortless way to bring
practice into your daily life—instantly!
When we say “experiential,” we mean this in the broadest sense. At a
minimum, there are bodily experiences, mental experiences, and spiritual
experiences. When you see a Gold Star Practice or a 1-Minute Module, try to
open yourself to whatever form of experience is involved: bodily, mental,
spiritual, or any combination of the above.
1-MINUTE MODULE
What’s Your Deepest Motivation?
It’s important to connect with what practice means for you. Here’s a way to
check in with your motivation. You can try this now, but really, it’s a great

thing to do regularly, at the beginning of any practice session—and it takes less
than a minute!
Place both hands over your heart, and take a few deep breaths. Feel any
activity in your mind, heart, and gut. Now, thoughtfully feel into your deepest
motivation for practice. What is your real desire? What’s behind the “pushes”
or “pulls” that you’re experiencing right now? What’s arising in your self-
awareness?
You might be seeking something extraordinary; you might just be curious
about what will happen; or you might feel something that you can’t really
describe. Feel what motivates you most deeply in this moment and be aware of
it.
Finally, feel or be aware of the Witness of your experience—the Witness
being the part of your awareness that simply observes the content that is your
experience. What is the experiencer behind this and every experience? What is
it that’s aware of, and therefore not, your motivations?
Breathe and relax into this awareness for a few moments. . . .
en let it go, and move on.

2
What Is Integral Life Practice?
Whatever your motivation, the intention to begin, renew, or deepen a practice
is a wonderful rst step. But once you’ve made that choice, how do you follow
through with it? irty years of experience have shown us that your practice
will turn to mush without a framework for organizing it. An Integral
framework can help you make sense of the many options available to you,
providing ultimate exibility and inclusiveness, so you can most fully and
deeply honor your intentions and fulll your potentials.
A Radically Inclusive Approach
e Integral Life Practice framework allows for maximum exibility. It’s not a
program you must follow uncritically, humorlessly, and perhaps even with a
sense of superiority, until you’re enlightened, more successful, better looking,
and someday hopefully perfect. It gives you a set of tools for designing a
unique and personalized practice, in whatever form works best for you right
now, with the understanding that what works best will change over time.
e “Integral” part of ILP is that it is radically inclusive. To be this, it draws
on a conceptual map called AQAL (which stands for “All Quadrants, All
Levels”—we’ll get deeper into this in a moment). AQAL (pronounced ah-
qwul) is a theory of everything, a way of comprehending life and reality in very
broad yet precise terms. AQAL is a map of consciousness, the Kosmos, and
human development, at every level and in every dimension that presents itself.
Kosmos with a “K” is the word the ancient Greeks used to denote a universe
that includes not just the physical reality of stars, planets, and black holes

(which is what “Cosmos” usually means), but also the realms of mind, soul,
society, art, Spirit—in other words, everything.
Technically speaking, AQAL is a map of maps, or a meta-theory that
incorporates the core truths from hundreds of other theories. It organizes the
profound insights of the spiritual traditions, philosophy, modern science,
developmental psychology, and many other disciplines, into a coherent whole.
AQAL accounts for the many perspectives that great thinkers, teachers, and
researchers have brought to our understanding of self and world.
But it doesn’t stop there, because AQAL is also intuitive—it describes the
terrain of your own awareness. You don’t need hi-tech equipment or an
advanced degree to enjoy the benets of an AQAL-informed perspective. All
you need is to bring a new kind of awareness to your lived experience.
It’s similar to learning a second language. At the beginning, it may feel a
little awkward as you’re memorizing new vocabulary and fumbling with new
ways of expressing yourself. In time, however, you discover that the more you
apply the new grammar to real life situations, the easier it becomes to
remember and use it, even if you still instinctively think in your native
language and translate to the second.
With practice, you begin to think in the new language with greater ease and
mastery. Eventually, you even begin to dream in the new language. And you
haven’t lost your old language; you’ve only become bilingual. e more uent
you become, the more the language infuses your being and becomes a part of
who you are. Soon the words effortlessly ow from your lips and you’re able to
communicate with different kinds of people in totally new ways. Your world
has expanded to include new horizons that you may have never thought
possible.
Integral Life Practice Is “Powered by AQAL”
Because AQAL attempts to map the Kosmos itself, ILP engages nearly every
aspect of our lives. As you embark on an Integral Life Practice you will learn to
hold more perspectives, and to do so more freely and exibly, exercising every
dimension of your being. It’s not just a mental game, but a felt and lived

embodied intelligence. Integral Life Practice is AQAL applied to life—a life of
conscious evolution in all parts of your being.
In creating Integral Life Practice we asked some key questions:
What are the most effective and essential practices of the ancient
traditions?
What new insights into practice are offered by the most current
discoveries?
How can we nd the patterns that connect the most diverse insights and
methodologies?
How can we use this knowledge to promote a lifetime of growth and
awakening?
We’re not the rst to attempt a synthesis of East and West, or to extract the
spiritual wisdom from the religious traditions. It does seem though that AQAL
provides some powerful missing keys to a truly universal approach to practice
that is still capable of respecting—and even empowering—the healthy
differences between divergent paths.
As grand as this may sound, the basic principles are not particularly complex
or difficult to grasp. Integral Life Practice is designed for and by people living
within the pressurized schedules of the 21
st 
century. You can’t afford to waste
your time any more than we can. at’s why, if a practice isn’t high-leverage,
you won’t nd it here. ILP is perfectly compatible with a fast-paced
professional lifestyle. But we haven’t cut corners either. If you want to go truly
deep in your practice, ILP can help you do that quickly and directly.
How does ILP work? First, we suggest a modular approach to practice. An
ILP module is a category of practice that relates to a specic part of your being,
such as body, mind, spirit, or shadow. Identifying your practice modules will
give you an overview of your practice life, allowing you to determine which
areas you’re exercising and which you’re leaving out.
One of the benets of a modular approach is that with just a handful of
modules you can engage all the key areas of your life—while maintaining full
choice of exactly how you do so. ILP does not dictate the specic practices you

should do—and by “practices” we mean consciously and regularly performed
activities such as yoga, weighifting, journaling, acts of service, and so on.
Rather, it suggests a few general areas—i.e., modules—that are essential, and
others that are also important but optional, and then allows you to decide
exactly how you want to engage those areas. is makes it easier to choose the
practices that are right for you, while still covering all the bases.
Second, ILP is scalable, which means you can simplify and shorten your
practice to accommodate your time frame. Do you often nd yourself too busy
for practice? You can do a basic form of Integral Life Practice in as little as ten
minutes a day. us, anyone, no matter how busy, can have an Integral Life
Practice.
Integral Life Practice is . . .

Are you interested in deep and rapid transformation? You can also use the
ILP principles to engage a committed life of practice at the deepest level—with
the same intensity of a traditional monastic or an Olympic athlete. Your
practices can stretch to several hours each day and may include attending
retreats or living in a dedicated practice community.
Do you have a wide or very specic range of practice interests? ILP is
customizable, letting you bring your unique interests, passions, and needs into
play. It doesn’t impose rigid structures on you, but rather creates a exible,
open space in which you can creatively engage the many dimensions of your
being.

When we do suggest particular practices, such as the Gold Star Practices,
these are condensed and distilled—keeping what’s essential and discarding
what isn’t—in order to give you the “most bang for your buck.” You can be
sure you won’t be wasting your time.
Finally, ILP is Integral, by which we specically mean “powered by AQAL.”
AQAL is the most comprehensive map of consciousness available at this time,
and Integral Life Practice puts it to use to create a cutting-edge form of
practice for the 21
st 
century. e AQAL structure of Integral Life Practice
makes room not only for higher growth and self-actualization, but also and
especially for awakening to, or recognizing, the Suchness or ever-present is-ness
of this moment, and this one, and this . . .
e Universal (and Particular) Adventure of Waking Up
e adventure of awakening is among the most universal of human dramas. It
takes every possible form, and thus it’s an utterly creative, unpredictable, and
unprogrammable process. e river’s twists and whitewater sometime include
passages such as the “dark night of the soul,” or gates through which no one
passes except on their knees. It can be experienced as an ordeal of
transformation, a process of “blossoming,” or as a romance with God.
e principles of ILP are remarkably clear and simple, putting practice
within the reach of almost anyone. It provides an organizing framework for a
lifetime of learning and transformation. By illuminating the big picture of
consciousness, life, growth, and awakening, and distilling the essentials of
practice, it helps you drop any unnecessary baggage and focus on the potent,
juicy heart of the matter while giving you room to do so in your own style, in
your own unique way.
Each traditional path paints a unique picture of what waking up looks like.
Even modern scientic consciousness began with its own “enlightenment.” ILP
is not about rejecting any particular form of awakening in favor of the next
new fad. It’s about understanding and supplementing existing paths, enabling
them to function even more deeply, in a way that adequately addresses life in
the 21
st 
century.

ILP presents a new, clear framework through which practitioners (of any
path or religion, or no religion) can not only understand and upgrade their
existing practice, but communicate deeply and meaningfully, across diverse
paths, about the universal matter of practice.
at means that Christians, Jews, Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus, and any
other religious, indigenous, and trans-traditional practitioners can all make use
of this Integral approach and talk about their practices in a common language
(which, incidentally, may provide new connections, highlighting how much
they have in common—with each other and even with those that hold non-
religious worldviews). Even atheists and agnostics can put ILP to work in their
lives, since the AQAL framework is neutral with regard to “belief.” It doesn’t
require (nor does it prohibit) any particular belief system.
is addresses a serious need. A Buddhist could easily discuss with a friend
in the same tradition how to apply his or her spiritual practice to life
challenges. But could a Buddhist do that with a Christian? Or a Muslim? e
same holds true for spiritual aspirants outside of these traditions. We need to
begin to engage a practice conversation across and beyond traditions. e
growing international community of spiritual practice needs to establish a
common vocabulary if we are to come together in service of the greater good.
us, this book begins a conversation about a new evolutionary direction in
personal practice, one that will be continued by future explorers on the edges
of human potential. Integral Life Practice is helping to dene an emerging eld
of study, inquiry, and application.
Launch Pad: 4 Core Modules
Integral Life Practice has 4 Core Modules:
Body
Mind
Spirit
Shadow

Additional important modules include:
Integral Ethics
Integral Sexual Yoga
Work
Transmuting Emotions
Integral Parenting
Integral Relationships
Integral Communication
Figure 2.1
Start with the 4 Core Modules.

Figure 2.2
Additional modules.
e universal starting point for ILP is the 4 Core Modules. at’s because
they relate to four primary dimensions of your individual being: body, mind,
spirit, and shadow. ey don’t require anything or anyone else but you. So you
can, if you wish, work on them by yourself. If you consistently engage practices
in each of these four areas, you’ll empower and turbocharge your overall
development. You will be better able to function inwardly and outwardly,
through multiple perspectives, with greater clarity, presence, and vitality in
practically any area of your life.
Traditional spiritual paths have usually emphasized only two or three of
these modules—they almost never included the Shadow module. Modern and
postmodern paths of self-development often do include shadow work, but
some jettison the Mind module, and most usually lack the depth and rigor of
the meditative traditions in the Spirit module.
If you only take on one practice in each of the 4 Core Modules, you’ll be
doing ILP. at’s all it takes. And if you do it wisely, you’ll avoid the common
pitfalls that can otherwise hold back meaningful transformation.
Some people ask, “Well, what if I really need to focus on something else
besides the 4 Core Modules?” Of course you do! You can bring awareness and
care to all your key relationships and functions (career, intimacy, family, and
more) in the additional modules. And any module could be your focus at any
given time. All the modules—core and additional—are important. If you’re in
a phase where you’re looking to align your career with your life’s purpose or
your heart’s passion, then you probably want to focus on the Work module
and on unfolding your unique self. If you’ve just fallen in love (or are looking
for love), or are working on issues with your intimate partner, then you
probably want to focus on the Relationships module. If you’re starting a new
family—well, then, you guessed it, the Parenting module.
e 4 Core Modules are a recommended foundation, not a rigid, dogmatic
structure. e journey of your life will have many chapters, and the emphasis
of your practice can shift accordingly. e ILP modules are just a way to
account for the more central dimensions of your life. Moreover, you need not

think of a module as a rigid, compartmentalized, abstract unit of your being—
there’s no need to relate to yourself in a detached and clunky way. Modules
orient, balance, and integrate a life of practice. e exact terms are less
important than the energy, clarity, sincerity, and intentionality with which you
engage your practice.
Gold Star Practices
Each module contains any number of practices that you may choose from. For
example, the Body module includes a broad range of practices, including
weightlifting, aerobics, sports, swimming, yoga, qigong, diet, and nutrition.
Any practice that focuses on the embodied aspect of your life can be considered
a Body module practice. Likewise, practices such as prayer, meditation, and
devotional worship belong to the Spirit module, because they relate to the
spiritual dimension of your being.
We’ve developed a number of recommended practices in each of the 4 Core
Modules. We call them Gold Star Practices and they’re original, AQAL-based,
and especially appropriate for 21
st 
century life—integrating the best of
traditional, modern, and postmodern approaches. Many Gold Star Practices
are distillations of traditional practices—minus the religious and cultural
baggage. In some cases, we invented a practice from scratch, to address a newly
perceived need. All Gold Star Practices are streamlined and condensed,
covering the most relevant aspects of practice.
Listed in gure 2.3 are some Gold Star Practices in the 4 Core Modules. All
are described in more detail later in the book. e best way to nd out if you
like any of these practices, or if they really work for you, is to try them of
course!

Figure 2.3
Gold Star Practices.
Figure 2.4
Sample ILP with 1-Minute Modules.
Pressed for Time? Try a 1-Minute Module.

Your ILP can be as rich and expansive as you want it to be. But for when you’re
in a hurry, we’ve created quick versions of the Gold Star Practices that are
called 1-Minute Modules. A 1-Minute Module is a Gold Star Practice
condensed into a remarkably efficient and authentic exercise that takes very
little time to complete. It’s a Gold Star mini-practice, which you can do almost
any time or anywhere—at work, on the subway, after lunch, between classes,
just before bed . . . whenever.
e 1-Minute Modules are not a replacement for more intensive practices.
Ideally, you might have an hour or two each day to deeply engage your
practices; and sometimes, for example in an extended retreat, you would have
even more. But when you don’t have that much time, the 1-Minute Modules
help you keep in touch with the essence of your practices, which is light years
better then neglecting them completely.
By utilizing the 1-Minute Modules, you can do a full ILP, realistically, in
about ten minutes a day. is makes it easy to maintain your practice even
when you’re busy—and it also eliminates the main excuse for not practicing!
Anyone can make the time to practice ILP regularly.

Time to Devote Yourself Deeply? e Principles of ILP
Still Apply.
ere is no end to practice. After years of dedication, experienced practitioners
often work with the same modules in subtler, more nuanced ways. Once your
whole life is practice, you tend to work more deeply with your states of mind
and emotions. Your practice deepens in your relationships, work, and other
additional modules. And, of course, you continue to return to Body, Mind,
Spirit, and Shadow. Your practice should continually adapt, ex, and evolve as
you move into each new phase of life and maturity.
e principles of ILP will help you to design and keep rening an overall
practice that’s effective, balanced, and high-leverage. You won’t leave out any of
the essentials, or neglect major dimensions of your development, even during
periods when you concentrate on particular kinds of growth, such as an
intensive phase of meditation practice or a period of focused training for an
athletic event.
Practicing for 3 Kinds of Health
Regular practice changes us, in both dramatic and subtle ways. Looking at our
3 kinds of health helps us to see this more clearly:
1. Horizontal Health: Our dynamic fulllment of the possibilities for
awareness, aliveness, and care available to us at our current stage of
development
2. Vertical Health: Our continued growth into greater consciousness and
complexity—thus outgrowing old ways of being, and moving into new
stages of development
3. Essential Health: At any stage of development, our contact with,
attunement to, and realization of Spirit—the Mystery, Suchness, or is-
ness of this and every moment
ILP includes and integrates all three.

Even during phases of life in which practice apparently takes a back seat to
work or family, you’ll have tools so it can ex and morph appropriately. In fact,
the way you engage the modules and practices of your Integral Life Practice
can evolve over time: general guidelines can become rm commitments that
can develop into a natural and inherent orientation to every moment of life.
ere’s room not just for inhalation but also for exhalation—for all the
qualities and phases of a healthy human life.
Principles of Practice
No Quick Fix
One reason we call it Integral Life Practice is because there’s no quick x. If
there were, we’d be recommending it here. One of the primary hard-won
lessons of the last half-century and the human potential movement is that
weekend workshops wear off! e same is true for weeklong or monthlong
intensives. A lasting, committed, daily practice is the only way to produce
sustained transformation.
e quickest, shortest path to lasting change is a lifestyle that embraces
some kind of ILP, including at least the 4 Core Modules. Although this might
seem to require a lot of time (and sometimes even a minute seems like too
much!), it pays huge dividends by unleashing our potentials, freeing up our
energy and attention, and increasing our effectiveness and enjoyment in the
rest of life. We’ve found that we don’t have time not to engage in an ILP!
Integral Cross-Training
Typical cross-training is at. You do some aerobics, some weightlifting, maybe
some yoga—but it’s all at the physical level. What if we applied the same cross-
training principle—which holds that gains in one area will accelerate gains in
others—across all levels and dimensions of our being? Well, that’s the idea here.
Preliminary research suggests, for instance, that a meditator who also lifts
weights will progress faster in meditation than one who doesn’t—and similarly,
a weightlifter who meditates will progress faster in weightlifting. We can call
this phenomenon Integral cross-training synergy. e 4 Core Modules

simultaneously activate several powerful synergies, between body and mind,
spirit and body, shadow (the unconscious) and spirit. Additional modules can
further intensify these benets.
ough some practices seem to focus on one module more than others,
there’s a ripple effect: by engaging a module in one area of life, you increase the
effectiveness of every other module in every other area of life! at’s the power
of cross-training. e Shadow module, for instance, primarily addresses your
interior, psychological dynamics. But realize how many aspects of life the
shadow inuences. Becoming aware of and owning your shadow material will
bring greater intimacy and honesty to your relationships, free up repressed
energy in your body, add clarity and effectiveness to your work, increase your
capacity for authentic and ethical behavior, and may even help you improve
your nances (if, for example, you have some unresolved, unconscious fears of
money and power, and are able to face your fears and overcome them).
A Post-Metaphysical Approach
ILP is post-metaphysical. is principle is a bit more theoretical—but it’s
important. What “post-metaphysical” means here is that no perspective on
reality is merely given to consciousness. Every perspective is enacted. In other
words, you have to do something to see something. You have to look to know
that it’s raining. You have to use a microscope to observe an amoeba. You have
to meditate to understand what Zen masters are really talking about.
Old-fashioned metaphysics assumes that reality is just given to awareness,
unmediated by the contexts, actions, and perceptions of a person. A post-
metaphysical, Integral approach claims that you must actually do an Integral
practice to experience an Integral reality. Nothing presented in this book should
be taken merely as a proclamation of truth. In all cases, you have to follow the
practice injunction to determine for yourself whether or not what someone
calls the “truth” is really true.
If you want to know if the moons of Jupiter really exist, you must actually
learn some of the principles of astronomy and then look through a telescope.
Likewise, if you want to know whether the Zen state of satori, or
enlightenment, really exists, you must learn something about Zen and then
meditate, looking into the nature of your mind. Instead of unquestioning

belief or skeptical disbelief, a post-metaphysical approach requires an open,
inquisitive attitude. In a sense, post-metaphysics is an expression of the
scientic impulse—that is, of empirical experimentation and experiential
validation—but expanded to all levels and dimensions of our being, instead of
only the material plane.
Awareness, Care, and Presence
At its core, Integral Life Practice is not limited to the performance of specic
practices. It’s a sincere, inherent commitment to bring awareness, care, and
presence to every moment of life—and thereby to increase one’s awareness,
care, and presence. An ILP practitioner naturally strives for a healthy body, a
clear mind, an open heart, and a commitment to a higher purpose. is will
then show up in how you breathe and feel as you go through your day, in how
you do your job, how you treat your lover, how you respond to stress—it
touches every aspect, every moment of life.
It’s a profound thing to really be conscious, to really love—it means you’re
seeing, feeling, being in the moment—and yet you’re not stuck in any one
perspective, but free to ex and evolve with life itself.
Integral Life Practice is paradoxical. Your practices will progressively deepen
over time, like in the classic “gradual paths” of some of the traditions, which
can involve decades of diligent attention. But from the beginning, the path will
often be punctuated by moments of sudden awakening and freedom. In these
peak experiences, consciousness radically reveals itself. e true nature of
things is evident and obvious. But then soon, this vividness fades. Yet if peak
states occur frequently enough, the spirit of free consciousness eventually seeps
into the whole of life. So the universal path is both gradual and sudden.
It is also both specic and general. Although this book may seem like a
“how to” manual, ILP is much more than a self-improvement program. It
offers a distillation of the universal processes of awakening into higher states
and stages of consciousness. us, in a way, you can “do it.” But at a certain
point, it begins to “do you.”
e freedom into which human beings awaken has been present from the
beginning. ere was never a problem, never any need to transform ourselves.

Paradoxically, transformation is also important, and we are profoundly grateful
for it. At the moment of realization, our path is seen for what it was—a
container for unconditional awakening. We practice for the goodness, truth,
beauty, and joy of living our practice.
Your Integral Life Practice will keep evolving and deepening for the rest of
your life, becoming more and more intimate and real. How do you practice
with frustration, disappointment, and pain? How do you respond when
someone attacks you? What do you do—what can you do—when someone
you love dies? How do you face the stark reality of your own inevitable losses,
aging, and death?
is is when practice matters most. If you can illuminate your shadow
issues, if you can balance your body with proper exercise and nourishment, if
you can see multiple perspectives, if your nervous system can release tension, if
you can open into contact with more life and truth—all of these factors will
determine your immediate experience, how present and loving you can be with
whatever is arising, and whether—and how wisely—you can use it to grow.
But it’s not just the hard stuff that practice can help with—it’s the beautiful
stuff too. Life is innitely wonderful and awesome. Falling in love . . . the birth
of a baby . . . having a brilliant new idea . . . serving a higher cause . . . starting
a new business . . . traveling and experiencing another culture . . . having an
insight into the nature of reality . . . creating or enjoying a beautiful work of
art. . . . We’re stretched by all of it, whether it’s delicious or not.
Spirit’s light can blind you like a billion suns. e beauty of a single
teardrop can liquefy your heart. True love can crush you like a crumbling
mountain.
en your intimate partner says something that hurts or infuriates you, and
you forget the beauty and the love.
And then you remember—or rediscover—it again. Balance. Freedom.
Happiness. Sanity. Oneness. Ordinariness. And again. And that’s what practice
is for.
e Smart Way to Wake Up

e best thing is to just get started! Whether you’re a beginner or a veteran
practitioner, make use of this book to bring the most intelligent and useful
practices to your own life.
Once you have the basics down, it’s easy to begin your own ILP. Here is a
summary of how simply and quickly you can do so:
ILP has 4 Core Modules: Body, Mind, Spirit, and Shadow. It works via
the principle of cross-training.
All you need to start an ILP is one practice in each of the core modules.
See the ILP Matrix earlier in this chapter for examples.
Design your ILP and scale it to t the realities (large or small) of your
schedule, level of commitment, and state of inspiration.
Mix and match. Include practices from additional modules as
appropriate; focus on what’s most relevant and needed in your life.
Gold Star Practices are optimized for ILP—they’re particularly distilled,
concentrated, and effective, but not obligatory. Try a 1-Minute Module if
you’re busy.
e hard part is the school of life itself. But practice helps us be radically
more present, alive, and capable of embracing both the difficulties and
the pleasures of everyday life.

3
Get a Feel for Integral Awareness
“Integral” means comprehensive, balanced, and inclusive. Whenever we think,
feel, or act in an Integral manner, it carries a sense of wholeness or
completeness—like we’re not leaving out anything important. Usually, this is
an intuitive experience. It simply feels more right, more true, more in touch
with reality.
ere are also some very explicit ways that we can articulate an Integral
sensibility. e AQAL Integral Framework is one such articulation. By using
an Integral framework in our daily life, we can train our awareness to be more
Integral more of the time. We can use AQAL to deepen our feeling-awareness,
our intuition of wholeness, and our Integral Life Practice itself.
In chapter 2, we touched briey on the AQAL Framework as a theory or
map of everything. We said that Integral Life Practice is powered by AQAL—in
fact, it’s AQAL applied to life. AQAL is the map . . . and our being-in-the-
world is the territory. AQAL functions as a kind of reality-mapping technology
that shows how everything ts together and makes sense. Hence, we often say
that AQAL “makes sense of everything.” Yes, that’s a tall order, so please check
it out for yourself.
In this chapter, we’re going to introduce and explore one of the most
accessible aspects of the AQAL Framework: the 4 quadrants. (is is the “all
quadrant” part of AQAL.) ese four facets of your own awareness are so close
and self-evident they’re easy to miss! Many conicts or misunderstandings—
personal, political, cultural, business-related, and even spiritual—result from
neglecting to consider one or more of the quadrants. One of the rst and best
things we can do to get a feel for Integral awareness is to check in with the 4
quadrants of your own experience.

Four Dimensions of Being
e quadrants refer to four dimensions of your being-in-the-world: your
individual interior (i.e., your thoughts, feelings, intentions and psychology),
your collective interior (i.e., your relationships, culture, and shared meaning),
your individual exterior (i.e., your physical body and behaviors), and your
collective exterior (i.e., your environment and social structures and systems).
Figure 3.1
Taken together, the 4 quadrants are four aspects of your being-in-the-world.
ey also refer to four corresponding perspectives in your present awareness:
I, We, It, and Its.
Our Integral Life Practice is always arising in and as all 4 quadrants (this is
part of the Integral-ness of it), but sometimes a practice will emphasize one
quadrant more than another.
In the next four sections, we’re going to present exercises that can be used to
explore each of the 4 quadrants through the lens of their “I,” “We,” “It,” and
“Its” perspectives. at way, we’ll begin to get a sense of the multiple
dimensions in which all of our experiences arise—the terrain of our practice.
4 Quadrants = 360° of Life
Our lives, and our Integral Life Practice, arise 360°. Since our life arises in and
as all 4 quadrants, we can engage it with more balance and intelligence by

accounting for these four primordial perspectives. But Integral Life Practice
doesn’t break life into four, or four hundred, pieces. It’s grounded in awakeness
to life’s wholeness and singleness, its “Integral-ness.” While particular practices
will often emphasize one quadrant more than the others, all 4 quadrants are
still present in every practice occasion.
Figure 3.2
e 4 quadrants are four perspectives in your present awareness.
Get a Feel for “I”
Tune into your “I” space, your interior as a conscious individual, an
intentional sentient being with a sense of “self.” What’s going on in there?
What’s arising within the landscape of your own consciousness? No one can
fully answer this except you. Your behavior can provide clues, but your inward
eye is best suited to answer these questions, because your interior, your “I”
space is invisible to others.
An itch here, a tickle there. Pain in your lower back. Energy after an intense
workout. Exhaustion after a long day. Tingling pleasure from the soft touch of
a lover. Hunger for a midnight snack. Sore feet. e stickiness of dried sweat.
What sensations do you feel in your “I” space?
Anger toward a world gone slightly mad. Compassion toward all of us doing
the best we can. Apathy when you don’t feel you can make a difference.

Excitement when receiving a paycheck. Disappointment after opening it.
Happiness walking in the moonlight. Boredom at work. Intense love blowing
open your heart. Melancholy for no reason. Fear that you won’t reach your
potential. Gratitude for who you are right now. Envy that you’re not there,
doing that, with them. Joy waking up. What emotions do you feel in your “I”
space?
Inner voices chime in constantly: the controller, the skeptic, the protector,
the critic, the judge, the pusher, the wounded child. “You’re not good enough.”
“at’s not safe.” “Push harder.” “at’s wrong.” “Do this instead.” “at’s
bullshit.” And that traumatic memory keeps popping up. Abused as a child.
Abandoned by your father. Betrayed by a friend. And the long shadow bag we
drag behind us, stuffed with all those qualities we’ve disowned and project
onto others. “I’m not angry, but she is.” “I’m not jealous, but he is.” Or the
deadening numbness that comes from dissociating completely with a part of
ourselves. What psychological dynamics occur in your “I” space?
oughts, ideas, opinions, intentions, motivations, purpose, vision, values,
worldview, and life philosophy all exist within your personal interiors. All
concepts from “I think she likes me” to “E = MC
2
” arise in this “I” space.
Dreams light up in interior display with subtle images doing the strangest
things. Whether they’re horrifying, sexual, or luminous and exhilarating,
dreams open a subtle realm much different from our normal, waking state.
And that’s obviously just a taste of the phenomena that could arise in the “I”
space, the individual interior of this and every moment.

Figure 3.3
4 quadrants: emphasis “I.”
By practicing introspection or focused “I” gazing, moments of grace may
occur in which the moving waters of your interior become still. In place of the
typical currents and rapids, an illuminated mirror mind appears, lucidly
reecting your face, your Original Face—usually elusive, yet so obviously ever-
present. Radiant stillness opens the gateless gate of radical transparency all the
way down to the ocean bottom of your own awareness. Witness the empty
space holding the bubbly water that is your interior consciousness, your “I”
space.
Get a Feel for “We”
Choose any relationship that you’re in and imagine being together with this
other person. Recollect the shared feelings and emotions present whenever
you’re with them. Although you may not always agree with them, you can
relate to them in some way. ey have become a “you” rather than an “it.” A
“We” space exists when there is mutual recognition, communication, and
shared understanding. You and I experience shared feelings and visions and
desires and conicts, a vortex of love and disappointment, obligations and
broken promises, the ups and downs of almost everything we call “important”
in life. Right now you can feel the actual texture of those shared experiences,
thoughts, insights, and emotions—this miracle called “we.”

Figure 3.4
4 quadrants: emphasis “We.”
When I encounter you, and you and I communicate, we begin resonating,
sharing, and understanding each other, at least enough to exchange some sense
of meaning. Two “I’s,” become a “we.” ink back to the last time you struck
up an engaging conversation with a stranger. Recall how you felt before and
after the interaction. When you rst encountered the stranger he was an It, an
object that you could see, but did not really know. en you began talking
with him, exchanging stories, picking up on each other’s emotional state,
witnessing the human experience expressed in each other’s eyes. You could
actually feel a new “we” coming into being. With each word, each head nod,
each smile, each gesture of mutual understanding, each shared experience, the
we grew stronger.
Consider the vast diversity of “We” spaces: the family we, the workplace we,
the romantic we, the sports team we, the best friend we, the neighborhood
community we, the meditation group we, the national we, the global we, and
on and on. Notice that these shared spaces have actual felt textures, each
unique. “We” spaces are so common that it’s easy to forget what an incredible
miracle it is that two or more people can understand each other. In order for
communication to be possible, somehow you must be able to get into my
mind, and I must be able to get into yours, enough so that we are in each other
to the point that we both agree that we can see what the other sees. Amazing,
isn’t it?
Doesn’t it feel wonderful to be on the same wavelength with another person
who truly “gets” you? is magnicent “we” forms as you and I understand
each other, and love each other, and hate each other, and in so many ways feel
each other’s existence as part of our own being, which indeed it is.
Get a Feel for “It”
In contrast to the mutual understanding of “We” space, “It” space is the
perspective of looking at surfaces, objectifying things and people, and sensing
behaviors. “It” space has a feeling of “thingness” because it’s the realm of

individual exteriors. You can see it, touch it, taste it, smell it, hear it, and point
to it.
Turn your attention to the exterior dimension of your self, your “It” space.
e physical or gross body is a truly astonishing vehicle (and work of art)
allowing you to interact with the world. Many layers of complexity—from
subatomic particles to atoms to molecules to cells to tissues to organs to organ
systems—compose our physical body.
Take a look right now at just one square inch of skin on your arm. Consider
that in this square inch there are 4 yards of nerve bers, 1,300 nerve cells, 100
sweat glands, 3 million cells, and 3 yards of blood vessels. With a microscope
and a lot of free time you could look at each of these. How strange to think
that each of us spent about half an hour as a single cell, and today we have
around 1,000 billion cells! And by the way, 50 million of those cells will have
died and been replaced in the time it took you to read this sentence.
Our brain is perhaps the pinnacle of physical complexity. Nearly 45 miles of
nerves run from the brain to all parts of the body, and information races across
these nerve networks as electrical impulses at speeds topping 200 miles per
hour—generating enough electricity to power a 10-watt light bulb (or perhaps
a race of intelligent machines). e brain’s 100 billion neurons allow virtually
limitless possibilities for unique pathways.
Figure 3.5
4 quadrants: emphasis “It.”

Our Innards Are Actually Exteriors
ough our brain, blood, and guts may be located inside our physical bodies,
they’re still in our “It” space because they’re still exteriors of our being. You can
see them as physical objects. You may have to cut the body open, but you can
see every cell and every organ because they’re all objects or exteriors.
Stop and feel the “It” space that is the thump . . . thump . . . thump of your
physical heart. See the veins bulging from your arms lled with blood being
circulated through the body about 1,000 times each day over 60,000 miles of
blood vessels. ump . . . thump . . . thump 40 million times per year.
What you do with your physical body—your behavior—is also an example
of “It” space. How do you show up in the world? What do you do? It actually
takes more facial muscles to frown (43) than it does to smile (17). Facial
expressions occur in “It” space as do all body movements and behaviors. And
speaking of body movements, the World Health Organization reports that
approximately 100 million acts of sexual intercourse occur each day. e good
news is you burn 26 calories in a one-minute kiss, let alone . . . well, never
mind. All this covers only one of your bodies: your gross physical body. Your
“It” space also contains a subtle body and causal body. More on all 3 bodies
later.
Get a Feel for “Its”
Take a moment to look around at your immediate environment. Where are
you reading this book? In your bed? In a library? On a train? In the lobby of
your dentist’s office? On a hammock in the Caribbean? Wherever you are,
you’re in relationship with local exterior surroundings such as other nearby
organisms, buildings, and geographical landforms (such as mountains, rivers,
forests).
Now take a look at your clothing. Where did it come from? Who made it?
What material was used? What nancial system allowed you to purchase it?
How was it transported to a store near you? Or did you buy it over the phone
or the Internet? What laws were in place to make sure you weren’t cheated?

What political system governs the laborers who manufactured the clothing?
What pollution escaped into the ecosystem during its production? All these
questions point to the many different systems in which we’re enmeshed—and
that’s just tracing some of the systems surrounding the clothes on your back.
Try this visualization: zoom out from your immediate family system to your
neighborhood to your city to your country to your planetary hemisphere to
the whole Earth to the solar system to the Milky Way galaxy to the entire
universe. Now reverse: start with the universe then zoom in to the Milky Way
to the solar system to the Earth to your planetary hemisphere to your country
to your city to your neighborhood to your family system. As you visualize the
great web of life, feel your connection with the many physical ecosystems in
your “Its” space.
A feeling of interconnectedness is natural once a person can comprehend his
or her participation in the world’s countless intertwining systems. Examples of
shared exteriors include political systems, legal systems, and economic systems.
Institutions (for example, educational, governmental), businesses (such as
Google), and nonprot organizations (like the Red Cross) mesh together to
form society’s infrastructure. e intersecting meshwork of social systems
profoundly affects our lives and development in countless ways.
ese intersections include, perhaps most interestingly, extensive systems
and networks of communication that link us all together. An increasingly wired
society connects us through new ways of exchanging information. e exterior
of communication refers to the distribution mechanisms through which
information travels, such as mass media, book publishers, cell phone networks,
direct TV satellite systems, and, of course, the Internet. Sound familiar?

Figure 3.6
4 quadrants: emphasis “Its.”
e Big 3: I, We, and It
Sometimes, for convenience, the right-hand quadrants (It and Its) are
combined, and the 4 quadrants are simplied into “e Big 3”: I, We, and It.
Nature and society together form your “Its” space—the exterior contexts in
which you exist.
All 4 Quadrants, All the Time . . .
You’ve probably noticed that although we’ve considered them one at a time
these four dimensions of being are always co-arising (or, more precisely, “tetra-

arising,” which means arising as four d