 having it both. So you have your instance, Instance is the house. Inside the house
 has a Bruce Banana campaign. Next two, siblings to the Bruce Banana campaign, are
 Master G. O'Malley's ship book. Under the book is the card game, so there's sub
 campaign. So Bruce Banana campaign, Instance, Bruce Banana Residency, one
 campaign, Master G. O'Malley's ship, another campaign. Why do you say it with campaigns? Why do you say it with campaigns?
 Why do you say it with campaigns? I think I said for campaign owners. Do you have
 separate campaign owners? What's the different owners? So Bruce Banana Residency were
 co-owners, Master G. O'Malley's ship, I'm the owner, but Master G. O'Malley's ship is
 inside Bruce Banana campaign, so they have affordances to be able to talk to each
 of me. The technically the Master G. O'Malley's ship campaign at the top level is
 owned by me, but the sub should be the first draft doing the thing is owned by my mom.
 What does she want? She's literally the sub campaign owner. What's the sub campaign?
 The sub campaign is Crapa messing out a ship book, Crapa card, Crapa non-profit.
 I thought you meant that. I am Master the game of out a ship. The world that this
 all lives in, so that's why they're hanging out like this. So she owns all this now.
 Can you map this shit out? Yeah. We'll do it on the board.
 This is what I was explaining to her too, because this is the power of it, like you
 guys keep talking to me about it, but it's basically good for ideas.
 Okay. See that par is in there.
 Apparently far as engine kind of instance. Great. This produces this data structure.
 Inside the Bruce Banana. It's past the stream, the game, Elisha, and Bruce.
 Oh, yeah. Yeah. What? Yeah. Yes, of course. Yeah.
 But Bruce Banana residency has a gather resources campaign. In fact, that isn't the thing.
 Bruce Banana residency is a gather resources campaign. Is it? Yes.
 That's the ultimate ontological goal of the residency is gathering resources for the instance of the Bruce Banana.
 Not for the mainstream game of out a ship. Not necessarily, but how do you guide resources for mainstream game of out a ship?
 Great paper. We've got these. This is the deck. We'll call this the book.
 The Borg calls massing the analysis. This.
 So, this is part of the project. It is simultaneously the thing that is producing a data structure called the Bruce Banana and is a product of it.
 Yeah, this is just Bruce Banana residency.
 They have a hypothetical seventh reason that it doesn't seem to necessarily have a massing the analysis at its heart.
 Except how could it not? This was the organization. So, it's Bruce Banana residency just raising and just guiding resources for the purpose of guiding resources.
 Well, gather resources for the instance of the Bruce Banana. Just to keep itself alive.
 I mean, all the ways to do that. I mean, there's much simpler ways to do that. That can't be the purpose of the Bruce Banana residency, so just raise money to keep itself alive.
 That's what you do after they build it the wrong way. For the perfect joke that is me getting hit on the base right now, you end up with a lifelike mass.
 So, it has to get built from the ground up as though it's something that makes the language, which means it itself means to be calling it survival mode, which is what all residencies do.
 This isn't even just like a Bruce Banana thing. It's like the second use of the word residency is like, oh, there's a piece of land that has been used to host artists who otherwise would have to use that resource sometime to not be making art.
 If the Bruce Banana residency is producing products off of these space and forces of its land, that becomes a feature of the thing that creates more whatever value you go up for with an F. You can take this to TDT.
 It's like, hey, instance TDT. You may not do a Bruce Banana residency. You may do a TDT residency, or you may do a TDT deck, or book, or whatever, any of the data structure is if this were to be worked, can make the choice to keep the provenance of a bunch of things that worked.
 We're using the same tech, but we're telling a different story. So, if that is the next question, that was recent.
 Is it okay? And then the question is, is keeping itself alive, is that good? Is that not a high enough, you know? Is it high enough, like, you know, because, like, I was asking that question initially, like, you know, is it, is that it, like, you know what I mean, like, think about the Bruce Banana?
 Like, as a yes and if designed well, if the first thing that motherfucker produced was a bars engine, think about number two, three, four, five, like, without needing to say, this is the thing that Bruce Banana gets to tell stories about the stuff that naturally emerges.
 I think this is the most time of the tree, like, the tree tells time, and the Bruce Banana has a tree nursery environment produces time at the speed of the residencies which are connected to three month productive loops.
 I think what could be called the story artifact, like, pretty, like, beautiful, story artifact of pictures, of, you know, albums of playlists or scents, of recipes.
 Um...
 I have software.
 Like, I was technology.
 Yeah, just technology.
 So, you know, imagine a newsletter that you receive and there is, it's an open story interactivity web page, right, that has bells and resources, and all of that is generated by, you know, the death of the story.
 That's, you know, can create, build agents, like, you know, the agents are trying to describe earlier, right, that could be an agent that's designed to, you know, pull.
 So, you know, I mean, in, you've had a record, you, you, you, I heard recreation of Portland from here.
 You know what, I was just coming from San Juan Island, you know, there's this, there's this town there.
 And the courts, no, it's not out of courts, it's Friday hour, and there's another part of Friday hours, like, 15 minutes, on the other side, it's the only other town there.
 It's very small, there's, like, literal castles there, and at the bottom, there's, like, a place where they were, like, they, one of the generals, oh, this would, this would remind me of, of the name of the place, but I think it's seen a name of this place, but this is the British,
 they, like, had the people, the soldiers, build in this limestone kiln, because just keep them busy, because I didn't have shit to do.
 So, it's like, let's just build this random shit, like, just keep them busy.
 It's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's.
 But it's, it's taking all of these, all of these interactions, right, right, going on in there, nobody's just got no signals.
 And, you know, it's called guiding certain things, right, boy, it's going to be just let it, like, vibe, you know, let it come up with the artifacts, like, around certain things, right, like, can we create it, right, let it be creative, it's like, let's do, let it do research, it's like, what is the state of the art,
 and what pages that people are going to be using now, or, like, artists are doing, you know, and, you know, collaborate with that artist, right, see what that looks like to have, like, web page that, like, that comes to life,
 or interactive art installation, you know, where, I don't know, but this technology.
 Yeah, yes, yes, the war, that's so, because, because right now, we're going to give a stupid word, because right now the, what is it called?
 Because that's, and, and, and that engine, right, and it's going, like, I need to grow, no artifacts, no artifacts, yeah.
 So, I want to, I want to throw, like, parties where it's like, if you know you know what's happening, you know, like, bars, imagine bars just show up around town, or just end up doing the box, and just get it, like, is there some party, that's how you know,
 you know, you can just receive a pot, it'd be like a job put in it. I'm saying, we can already do this, yeah, yeah, yeah, like, these people of this arbitrary vibe coefficient above the second they hit above seven.
 Well, everybody, we just play the game, like, you know, the games just show up, and they can be, you know, contributed games, like, you know, like, he'd be game designing, whatever, the games that the robots, you know, what's it called, what's it called?
 Generally, right, where people play the game, right, and you get to receive what's it called, a physical bar, because you did something in the game, or you hit a pot, go efficient, or you, whatever, whatever, that's the key, yeah.
 Sure. So, I feel like tonight, like, the, what's it called, the drop, like, because I just, I just jolly on the party for a second, right, but the, but I still, still suggesting that it's like, because on the, I don't know if you've seen it, like, on the, of course, you know, the, the event page in my page, right, it says
 that address and details will jump on, you know, it's still there, but, like, so, you know, he's waiting for the thing on the show.
 Yeah, and there's exactly, right.
 And so, like, a very, like, a very simple, yeah, yeah, yeah, and so it's like the, the people that get it, or if we invite, they're like, you know, they get it, they invite, like, really, he advice, he can play, really kind, and everybody else is like, you know, he doesn't have that, everybody.
 Well, unless the thing is that you don't even need that really invite, you can literally,
 if, so the choose your adventure quests, that's the level one artifact, to have someone be able to run into a game, answer a couple questions real quick.
 Get to a point in the game, have a festive environment, get sent to the beginning, try and do it again, and get a completely different quest.
 The magic moment is about the sixth time they do that, where it's like, wait a second, it's adapted.
 That's, and the fifth time through, you stumble upon an invite to, a part of an NPC with a cool hat, it's just like, hey, you were here last time, I've never seen NPC before, who are you?
 Is this thing going on? Well, hell yeah, I was looking at like, and then, it is now paving a path.
 And that direction, and essentially what you're seeing with the main work with the campaigns that people can create, the sub campaigns people can create, is the ability for people to insert those in the mercy code, right?
 It's just like, oh, I have a campaign, something, now I can just, as part of the game dev, but it's kind of the game environment, right?
 It's just, just, insert, like I'm a regular person, and I just want to campaign to where is your mom's campaign, let me change the month.
 The, uh, my freedom to give more battleship, your mom wants that. Yep.
 But what do you own in it?
 Oh, this, and this, and Robinson. This is the last piece, this is the racing matrix stuff.
 If suddenly you can know, based on the data, who an owner is, what the owner moves are, who is accountable, what are the accountability moves, how those moves connect to the different bars that are being produced.
 You can run these common tutorials, determine this degree, and non-destructively fractal, just creativity prompts for making the fundamental move of whatever campaign is at play.
 I mean, if I take the same step five times, I land the same place five times.
 Uh, I guess if you were to make the same call five times, the call would have been made grammatically five times.
 The term is important, it has to go through the state one, the two, three, two, four, one, two, two, three, four, and it knows state one, two, three, and everything we do on state one, two, three, and it produces grammatical story.
 The same thing.
 What is the same thing every time?
 Does not produce the same thing, that's the reason why they deterministic infinite generating.
 What is deterministic?
 What is deterministic?
 The process, repeatable steps, but the output is not deterministic.
 The output is...
 Actually, that's a big one.
 I mean, that's why I put it as handbook.
 And that's just the ending.
 That is a finite book, a very specific world type steps that produce an infinite array of stories.
 So, your mom owns our deck book.
 So now, she wants to put those things in the game, she cannot do that.
 She cannot do that.
 That's a campaign.
 Which is a campaign, it's in this case.
 So...
 I think we might be always thinking in terms of campaign, you know what I mean?
 Like...
 I will say really interesting.
 Because, okay, the thing has already been done as well.
 I'm saying, that seems like a very easy thing to just resolve.
 Yeah.
 Oh, it's not hard.
 It's just, it was only emergent at exactly this point.
 No, but it's not though.
 Because the one of the things that could not be done, because I think we were describing it,
 that the way it was built, originally, is built looking at what was it called?
 I just want to make sure we are talking about the same thing.
 Right.
 So, this is me and my friend.
 We're talking about the same feature.
 Right.
 Which is, I want to create a new instance.
 Right.
 And, you know, we're not thinking about it as what is it called?
 You know, something else.
 Yeah, new instance.
 Right.
 And campaigns in new instances.
 No.
 So, for example, the Bruce Banana.
 That's an instance.
 That's an instance.
 So, the instance is the world.
 Okay.
 Maybe I'm using the wrong language.
 But you have your birthday party.
 Yes.
 Right.
 That was, what was that?
 Yes.
 That was like a campaign or an instance.
 That was an instance that had campaigns.
 But that's not part of the Bruce Banana instance.
 This is where it got confusing.
 So, yeah.
 I'm with you.
 And this, it showed up in the database.
 This was the database.
 I was like, oh, I put this up because it got built upside down.
 We had two instances.
 We'll call this the campaign.
 I had to scrub it out.
 The guy just, it's still there.
 He's still there.
 I cut it out of the wiring because it's not for that.
 It was a temporary instance.
 Not a global.
 But it's still there.
 It's still there.
 Yeah.
 No, no, it's not like it's still rocker over here.
 It's like, if you're going through it, I can navigate there.
 You send me back to the contract calculator.
 Like when you're going through the experience, I went through that yesterday.
 I think you're going through your classical, one of some of your first requests or whatever.
 You go through the...
 What was going to be there instead?
 What is the story there instead of that?
 So this is what I'm getting at.
 So, I was contemplating.
 There are always two instances.
 I had to discover this.
 This is something a coach taught me.
 I was like, "Shit, I did not have this separated in my brand.
 Fuck all."
 And now the emerging problems are coming from this is that this is the real world world.
 And this is the narrative world.
 That's happening right now.
 Yes.
 Or just, not even right now.
 Like in the same way that like Fantasy High Season 3 has finished.
 I have watched all of it.
 I'm watching it again.
 That world is still somewhere.
 In the same way that I was making fun of someone.
 I was like, "Santa doesn't exist.
 Santa is real."
 That amount of our brain that lights up at the very least is evidence that something in the
 world called Santa has imprinted itself on the human experience.
 There are non-real, non-extant real places that we're trying to build with bars.
 You've got to make that separate.
 So if, how to, so when people interact with the groups, the nation won, the concrete wasn't
 separate in sense.
 I mean, because the aspects that you can create here, the stories that are the bars, the
 recipes, those are like the, yes.
 And you can generate like, you know, storylines from the stuff from all of that gets generated.
 But the concrete instance, right, which was the last party, right?
 Someone also did have like, right, because I was real master.
 I was brilliant.
 Yeah.
 Though that's, okay.
 So we're dancing around something that's very important, that is one of the hardest things
 to talk about with the system.
 I love it.
 It's great.
 This is amazing.
 The grill master role would have still been here, but it wouldn't have been concrete flavor
 because the real world emerges into the party immediately grill master, and that role emerged
 in this part of the instance back in the narrative.
 But, since they're already on top of each other, it took on the flavor.
 Do you try to make one to one?
 I want to use it like a case-based transformation, but it does not.
 I will, I mean, when I say the useless answer first, then it goes to the useful answer.
 Yes.
 The useful answer is, this is where it is okay for the robots to hallucin.
 In fact, the immersion function is a function of how much it can hallucinate.
 It made some of that shit.
 I was like, that's lapsed.
 That's good sauce.
 Like, no notes.
 And we spent all of our energy on the real world applications of it, and that was sort of the
 benefit that happened.
 But what we've also seen is that we've run numbers.
 Every single party that we've thrown, every single version of the game that we've thrown
 at hasn't done a thing.
 We've thrown so many groups, but it's not that there is also just, like, a way that things
 emerge in this space that doesn't need a story there.
 On top of this, on the hash, on the hat, I'm like, it always kind of pops up.
 The thesis of this whole process is that the highest impact thing that you can do, from
 an allyship standpoint, is to merge these worlds to such a degree that they start generating
 synergistic movement with each other.
 You can do one or the other, like, the beauty of this, which I haven't spicked out, which
 I would need to, if that isn't the case, but the ability to create grammatical versions
 of this, since these are being produced by the Bar of Indian, and the Bar of Indian itself,
 uses these as developmental tools, like this whole thing that is being metabolized by a
 architecture that has these fundamentals.
 If someone were to make a new instance, it's still been inherent to all of these ontologies.
 It's only when you truly fortiate in the repo as they're changing the vibe in the repo.
 The issue slash benefit of the conclave is of the entire instance is conclave flavoring.
 Kind of needlessly.
 It doesn't have to be.
 It's kind of nice, but you have the base doing the way to kind of maintain some of that without
 doing so much through it, right?
 You can have the main, you know, the primary open source repo, and in that repo, there
 are agents that you look at that need to understand your code changes that you're suggesting,
 right, invite that agent to it, you know, and suggest editing, you know, like, could
 develop with you, right, you know, that's, you know, to help.
 And then over time, you know, as more and more people come to it, right, that agent is getting
 built in itself also and improving, right, so that it can be some auditor of this, like,
 key meet-ups, right, of the whole system, right, to keep some level of history.
 So, so many times, of course, forget completely, and, like, unwire all those things, right,
 but if you are, you know, contributing, staying in line with the, you know, the primary,
 and you can do that at any point, right, at any version of the total point, right?
 But as long as, you know, contributing, you're able to contribute to the, you know, main
 repo, there's some level of alignment that you put in, right, that's, you must look for
 that, that is getting, you know, by growing council, right, getting, what is it called?
 Bad, make better, stronger, and easier to use, and you would take me to the game.
 Better, stronger, faster, harder, and easier to use, yeah, like, but, and, and, and, and,
 our work is over, yeah, but, so, so yeah, but, that, that way you can force, you can force, like,
 too much, like, not to, you know, put in those controls in place, right, yeah.
 Narrative user interface is the company, the process of the kernel is the Bruce Banana.
 And BARS is the way that we move compute, inspiration compute, through the process of
 kernel in this narrative user interface to produce story effects.
 And then make some improvement. I mean, haven't gotten to this yet?
 We're not going to have the partying stuff, but the stuff that I've started to see
 would just, like, to the maps, and the avatar.
 I really don't mind, but my birthday, what is it called?
 Week with it, like, the pictures that I've taken, the videos, the stories, like, very nice, like, from the party,
 you know, last week, a couple of years ago, to go into a plan to do it.
 And then I went to August residency.
 In Ben Loon? No, no, I went to someone else.
 My friend, Kate. My friend, Kate.
 I think I'll see what I thought. I think that's easy. You can do it. Choose your adventure quest through the story artifacts.
 And I'll add some playlists in there. See if we can come up with some bars.
 Okay, here we go. This sucks. This sucks. I hate this. I don't want to make it. We're going to make it. We're going to make a good chunk of money out of it.
 Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
 We have done a free version of this game, but it used to be pretty though, it used to
 have technology to be able to have people design things, and because it's open source, people
 can add, you know, because one of the tricky things, right, is also there needs to be some
 management of the UX, UI, you know, in that case, like, so, same thing as somebody wants
 to add a campaign, right, how do they want that campaign to look, or how do you want to
 interrogate with that, you know, you want it to be a newsletter style, like, what fonts,
 right, what can you embed, like, you know, a whole can you host that separately, you know,
 like, you know, yes, PDK, SDK, right, like, but how easy is it to do it, is it to be in
 the game world, right, is it just open source, maybe you have to develop it yourself, right,
 that's the question there.
 I will say this, because the story effects, consciousness process is the secret sauce
 and is the product, that's a quest that sage level people interacting with the repo can
 figure out, because the more people figure out, technically, the less advantage that
 we have for what is obviously going to be a burgeoning style of collective story to
 me.
 How do you make money up for it?
 I like all the different photos, all the different artifacts, all the different bus objects,
 like, whatever you do, put them on cards, stick them on the deck, and it's like, hey, I did
 a donation, cool, here's your apple card for the content, the story, the keys that allow
 you to do.
 Then if the page can look like, or look like it, but it's one of the outcomes of the page
 to look like would be a bar, like, just like, you know, I went the bar covers out, you have
 a bar, and it's like, it's like, three dimensional, no, I don't know what I mean like that, and
 in that bar it's like, like, pretty shitty, people, they put an apple for this for years
 and years and years, for a thing called skeomorphism, you know, that is, remember on your phone,
 your notes app looks like a stick, you know, there was felt on, like, your contacts app,
 because it was meant to similarly look, you're on, like, a desk, not just a desk, that's
 like a rich guy's desk, yeah, everything had, like, a shiny, everything was, like, moving
 around, people were like, no, we need to abstract from the tech, like, this, this is knobs and
 dials, but this is a technological interface that, the likes of which I've seen maybe with
 knitters and switchboard operators, like, it's a very specific modern view, this is technology
 that looks like technology, an apple is always like, no, no, no, no, no, no, this technology
 used to look like human shit, like, it needs to be tied into deep patterns of what humans
 already do, we don't want to teach them anything, you would take learn things, but people know
 how to use this up there and have it, the ability to inject as much of this as possible
 to this app, if we are making a game that is immersive, the narrative user interface is
 the thing that makes the game immersive, every choice point being a choice, deeper, more
 on it, deeper, more on it, deeper, more on it, and when the subconscious panics like,
 holy shit, I did too much, you can take the headset off, but the impact has already been
 tracked, so even as people know it, or how much the interface with the game is still
 connected from there, I wonder what I would look like as some on this phone, like, just
 a piece of art, like, the data that's collected, like, in terms of just, like, you know, without
 any, you know, fire enjoyment, interpretation, in this phone just generating something, like,
 being powerful, something that has volume, something that has a spatula, like, you know,
 surface texture that moves through this, that has weight, more, like, can interact with
 somewhere without virtually or in person or whatever that looks like, or has a projection,
 or sound, or, uh, just call it an NFT. Yeah, it's whatever it is, right? That is quite
 interesting, the most accessible version of going down that path, which I absolutely
 will go, will require me to face a demon inside of myself, which I will gladly do, because
 I can tell demons are in quests, but I know of someone who has made art like this, and
 the only way that I will find someone who has not been to do it is to look at them closely
 enough that I can replicate them in a non-evil version, that I've seen it done, I've seen
 it done in sick ways, with garbage data, this is actually useful. That's all I'm saying
 about that. That's a who, that's a who question. Like, who right now builds this stuff just
 because I have another one that's not as big, but I'm glad to go on this list. I know a
 guy that channels these crazy Twitter art things that is full-blown sorcery magic, and
 they've just got this shit on tap, and that same way that I see everybody in the room.
 Their movement through the forest is a bit chaotic, it's not quite a story I can digest
 yet. But, they get the sauce.
 I think we should interview a friend as part of those British art facts. But just, like,
 the podcast and all the other episodes we're doing, I think you should trust me to not
 audio podcasts, but some, like all of this, I would say, they will be the audio recorded
 on the screen. But, like, the, like, a newsletter sort of deal. You know what I mean? That gets generated.
 I mean, plus, we can believe real, this, probably should be unmuted for that, like, that's the
 reason you sit down, and then it presents. As society, we've got it all backwards. Like,
 they're like, what? So, you wait for use to happen, and then you wrote it down, and then
 you read it on the TV. So, no. Have accolades, like, have interfaces to what is happening
 in real time, tell people what's happening in real time, then write that shit down.
 This is very interesting to me. This is a place that I'm not allergic to, I will say,
 if we can find a way to make these Lord-of-fact talents, then the quality, there's a ritual,
 there's a spell that is very specific to the podcast that I get out to the world.
 I think part of the podcast can be, like, a 10-minute section where we just review PRs.
 You know, just take a look at the PRs that I've made the crap for that episode,
 we have an agent that pops it up, and then we sit down, and they have the two-dimensional
 review to take a look together. Whoever is on the stuff, right, can discuss it.
 It should, the PR, have the shit agent, right, because there'll be a shit agent, right,
 that pushes things in a specific way, right, and does cannot write any code, right,
 cannot do anything, it's just, this job is just to ship, you know, stuff.
 You'll see that review of that, and it can either be a major part of the podcast,
 could be a minor part of the podcast, however I once wanted to do that.
 But actually it's like podcast weather, you know, it's just like, you know,
 like discussion around the app, right, and how it's getting built.
 So imagine a PR comes out, and so you can review the PR head of time,
 or have thoughts about it, and then come and talk about it, right, and then something,
 that conversation creates, it's all in fact, you know, all of this, it's on recording, right?
 But then decisions are made, right, progress is made, that's, it's another PR that is pushed,
 and it's not necessarily, it's not sequential like that, you know, because you can have,
 you know, fourths and things that are like, you know what I mean, right,
 things are going to be runny, and then parallel, and it's a question that isn't compute,
 that the cues of particular agent cues are going to use the computer, right,
 when it's, you know, no discussion, it's running, and I've pushed the PR, you know,
 the part of it is what resources we have access to, and we're making those decisions.
 [ Pause ]
 >> I'm a crazy person, so this is important, and I will fight any flight,
 it'll be so easy for me to do, I will definitely and elegantly destroy anything
 that tries to take this away from six podcasts, one for each game master fix, right?
 In real time, the tantalized energy that I had to, you know, reading poetry is on a podcast,
 what kind of pervert or what it would be when it was like the architects,
 and I was like, oh, to do it, well, that's a dead podcast, I'm like, oh,
 who's one that was mad about this, and I was like, the old wizard in the forest is like,
 no, we must create the ceremony or something, what, you don't have any diamonds,
 any barrels of diamonds to make, I'm like, okay, we're cute, you get your own plate,
 it's one of each a week, yes, so this is all right,
 is that what you're thinking, or does that make sense?
 >> That makes sense.
 >> From each of the different perspectives?
 >> So, it's a one-day no podcast, six days of podcast, one day no podcast.
 >> I mean, so if you want the actual tricks of it, there are four or five different ways
 to produce that type of content stack.
 But yes, the output would be the story of other people, it would be,
 of course, that is taking the story effect too, this sucks, I hate this game,
 I do this kind of, and it's going to intersect, I think intersecting is good in this case.
 >> So, it's raising awareness, raising awareness, raising awareness?
 >> I hate that, I hate that, I hate that, it's fine, it's fine.
 >> If you haven't noticed on a very specific white wearing style,
 we're in, I'd love to expand around a cent from them, and maybe I've seen them go.
 Where did we start this?
 >> I hate that.
 >> It makes sense, honestly, that's the medically strongest one,
 but it's always the one in the center, it's always reading and I put it in the center.
 >> Unless we're making an orchard, the orchard's always going to have a little squirrely
 ensues because in an orchard, at least, the wire is not supposed to cross.
 In an ecosystem, points of intersection is where all the shit happens,
 and so doing both at the same time is quite fun.
 It literally changes the energetics of the whole thing.
 It's like, oh, producing story effects, it goes to podcasts,
 but that's actually down one of entering our friend.
 What entering our friend is producing story effects.
 Ah, shit, raise awareness campaigns, produce story effects.
 As far as into those players, raise awareness campaigns, produce story effects.
 If the value proposition is some sort of donation to content pipeline,
 then constantly create story effects.
 So technically, because I am, I think I didn't need to do that, I think I'll ask.
 No, that's not a story, I don't know why, that's a rectangle.
 Let's see if there's a rectangle right there.
 I don't know.
 Okay, hold on.
 Shit, that's funny.
 Rectino things are actionable.
 Everything else is ontology.
 I'm technically this, and I will hide the actionable.
 Creativity prompts is trying its hardest to not be square.
 Fuck you, that's the whole output.
 It's not wrestling with me, trying to not be square.
 Why is the message in the analysis of squares?
 Because it is an ontology, the entire point is not a user.
 But it's an ontology that produces things,
 and what gives me real skill, or organizes on that.
 This is a story I'm gonna try.
 I need a little bit back on this.
 Which means, okay, T.O.T. steps out of blood.
 Let's say that it has all this space.
 Okay, literally a weird transformation that happens here.
 Pretty story effects is what is produced by bodies.
 Please, farther than farther than.
 I see some of it.
 Sucks.
 What do you want Sunday to be like?
 What do you imagine Sunday to be like?
 My dearest hope is all that I can deal with.
 Everything else is going to be in preparation.
 Running loops, I'm making quests, generating bars,
 eating food, and flirting, shame, or free,
 with my heart and skin.
 Maybe with a little bit of shame, a little bit of mox.
 Music, obviously.
 I don't know, but I know that it's now inside of this thing.
 That produces all of these things, so that could be interesting, too.
 I mean, I do think the content has prizes.
 Like, really figuring out the loop for how do we get this to feel.
 The ding ding ding.
 The ding ding ding ding.
 Yeah, I'll just build my, I think I'll have a one my birthday week.
 Yeah, what people present, I don't know,
 because I think it's where I was trying to get it.
 Yeah, but they get to see what mine looks like.
 That's real.
 Well, I think they see what's possible.
 Well, because this is real personal.
 This is, I see, I see.
 Well, also, I think having an activity like the craft space,
 the activity where people can produce on purpose bars for the collect.
 It's like the art bars, the ones that, you know, the ones that,
 I don't know how to make someone do this.
 That's crazy.
 We have an art bar.
 I think so.
 These are easy to do overnight, but we've got to try that.
 And, look at that.
 That's a hard point.
 But for the art, like, these would be the ones.
 You can take pictures of stuff.
 You can do plus objects.
 Plus objects, plus objects, plus objects.
 That's something we're going to need to make for mine to be pretty solid.
 Plus objects are moving through the game space.
 And, you know, stuff.
 Mad at me.
 But, I didn't learn something I had spoke with the other,
 few hours ago, I don't know.
 But, I put to myself, okay, what is the difference between going insane?
 Going insane, yeah, yeah.
 Like, there's gotta be a semantic difference.
 Otherwise, it's just a point flip and that feels cool.
 And I realized that when I go insane,
 but my feet are touching the ground.
 I'm usually growing up faster than I would like.
 But it's not destructive.
 It is actually constructive.
 It's just, I've only ever seen the world from this height,
 and now I'm about to see it from very tall height.
 So, it feels like it's that.
 That's kind of the craziest.
 It feels like it.
 But also, it's not just, it's not also that people just don't like,
 people don't just understand it as much.
 Like, it's not, it's not.
 It's, you have something that's here.
 But, I wouldn't see it.
 I wouldn't even call it here.
 It's like, yeah, yeah, whatever.
 Take it out all over the place.
 It's a looting capture.
 Yeah.
 Now, to make me a more fun.
 Yeah, it was you put the, put it on a piece of paper.
 On a bar.
 Oh, yes.
 It's juice baby.
 Juice.
 Please, please, please go ahead, juice.
 Shower.
 Mmm.
 That's cool.
 It's my coat.
